1
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access 
ScRNA- seq reveals novel immune- 
suppressive T cells and investigates 
CMV- TCR- T cells cytotoxicity 
against GBM
Xinmiao Long    ,1,2,3 Zuping Zhang,4 Yuzhe Li,5,6 Kun Deng,1,2,3 Wei Gao,1,2,3 
Meng Huang,5,7 Xiangyu Wang,5 Xiang Lin,1,2 Xiaoling She,8 Yiming Zhao,1,4 
Minfu Zhang,1 Cheng Huang,2,3 Shiyi Wang,2,3 Yinfei Du,2,3 Peng Du,9 Shuai Chen,1 
Qing Liu,5 Minghua Wu1,2,3
To cite: Long X, Zhang Z, Li Y, 
et al.  ScRNA- seq reveals novel 
immune- suppressive T cells 
and investigates CMV- TCR- T 
cells cytotoxicity against GBM. 
Journal for ImmunoTherapy 
of Cancer 2024;12:e008967. 
doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
 ► Additional supplemental 
material is published online only. 
To view, please visit the journal 
online (https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ 
jitc- 2024- 008967 ).
Accepted 11 April 2024
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Professor Minghua Wu;  
 wuminghua554@ aliyun. com
Qing Liu;  Lliuqingdr@ csu. edu. cn
Professor Shuai Chen;  
 13637499833@ 139. com
Professor Peng Du;  
 13699994376@ 163. com
Original research
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2024. Re- use 
permitted under CC BY- NC. No 
commercial re- use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ.
ABSTRACT
Background Glioblastoma (GBM) is a fatal primary brain 
malignancy in adults. Previous studies have shown that 
cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a risk factor for tumorigenesis 
and aggressiveness for glioblastoma. However, little is 
known about how CMV infection affects immune cells in 
the tumor microenvironment of GBM. Furthermore, there 
has been almost no engineered T- cell receptor (TCR)- T 
targeting CMV for GBM research to date.
Methods We evaluated the CMV infection status of 
patients with GBM’s tumor tissue by immune electron 
microscopy, immunofluorescence, and droplet digital 
PCR. We performed single- cell RNA sequencing for CMV- 
infected GBM to investigate the effects of CMV on the 
GBM immune microenvironment. CellChat was applied to 
analyze the interaction between cells in the GBM tumor 
microenvironment. Additionally, we conducted single- 
cell TCR/B cell receptor (BCR) sequencing and Grouping 
of Lymphocyte Interactions with Paratope Hotspots 2 
algorithms to acquire specific CMV- TCR sequences. 
Genetic engineering was used to introduce CMV- TCR into 
primary T cells derived from patients with CMV- infected 
GBM. Flow cytometry was used to measure the proportion 
and cytotoxicity status of T cells in vitro.
Results We identified two novel immune cell 
subpopulations in CMV- infected GBM, which were 
bipositive CD68+SOX2+ tumor- associated macrophages 
and FXYD6+ T cells. We highlighted that the interaction 
between bipositive TAMs or cancer cells and T cells was 
predominantly focused on FXYD6+ T cells rather than 
regulatory T cells (Tregs), whereas, FXYD6+ T cells were 
further identified as a group of novel immunosuppressive 
T cells. CMV- TCR- T cells showed significant therapeutic 
effects on the human- derived orthotopic GBM mice model.
Conclusions These findings provided an insight into the 
underlying mechanism of CMV infection promoting the 
GBM immunosuppression, and provided a novel potential 
immunotherapy strategy for patients with GBM.
INTRODUCTION
Glioblastomas (GBM) stand as the most prev-
alent and aggressive primary brain malig-
nancy among adults. 1 The current standard 
of care includes maximal surgical resection 
followed by radiotherapy and chemotherapy 
with temozolomide. Unfortunately, this 
aggressive management is rarely curative, 
cancer recurrence and death are almost 
inevitable. Individuals diagnosed with GBM 
exhibit a median survival of 15.4 months, 
with less than 5% surviving beyond 5 years. 2 
Currently, many novel GBM immunotherapy 
trials, including vaccines, chimeric antigen 
receptor T cells, and immune checkpoint 
blockade (such as programmed death 1 
(PD- 1)/ligand- 1 (PD- L1) blockade therapy), 
have shown only modest benefits in patients 
with GBM. 3 Lack of tumor- infiltrating T 
cells, as well as uniquely immunosuppressive 
macrophages, are significant barriers limiting 
the efficacy of immunotherapy in GBM and 
the relapsing and refractory treatment of 
WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC
 ⇒ Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection in glioblastoma 
(GBM) promotes malignant cell proliferation and mi-
gration, contributing to tumor progression.
WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
 ⇒ Our results elucidate the unique immune microen-
vironment of CMV infection in GBM. It shows that 
CMV primarily induces immunosuppression and 
facilitates tumor cell growth by mediating crosstalk 
between bipositive tumor- associated macrophages 
and FXYD6 + T cells during GBM progression. We 
have also developed CMV- T- cell receptor- T cells 
that effectively kill GBM tumor cells.
HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, 
PRACTICE OR POLICY
 ⇒ It provides a potential therapeutic target in a nov-
el subset of immune cells and offers new research 
ideas and methods for the development of cellular 
immunotherapy for GBM.
2
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access 
patients with GBM.4 There is an urgent need to decipher 
the pathogenic mechanism of GBM and develop more 
effective treatments for the patients.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a β-herpes virus which 
exhibits strict host specificity and establishes life- long 
persistence with alternating phases of latency and 
productive infection.5 CMV was reported present in many 
solid cancers, including breast, 6 prostate 7and medul-
loblastoma.8 Present mainly in tumor cells, the CMV 
infection may be tumorigenic, inducing the activation 
of mitotic signals transmitted by the products of proto- 
oncogenes such as c- fos c- jun and c- myc.5 9  Cobbs et al 
first reported the detection of human CMV antigens in 
GBM in 2002.10 Since then, many studies have attempted 
to address the controversial question of whether there is 
an association between CMV and GBM. 11 CMV encodes 
for a plethora of gene products that serve to evade the 
immune system by intercepting, for example, interferon- 
regulatory factor, signal transducer and activator of tran-
scription, and nuclear factor κB dependent signaling. 12 
However, it remains largely elusive how immune cells in 
the GBM tumor environment respond to the presence of 
CMV, especially macrophages and T cells. Meanwhile, it 
is unknown how CMV- infected GBM altered depending 
on the disease stage whether CMV- specific cell subsets 
are found in different uninfected CMV tumor microen-
vironments and/or exhibit distinct immune checkpoint, 
and how to design to use CMV as a novel, potential thera-
peutic target for the tumor.
In this work, we confirmed the presence of CMV infec-
tion in 60% of GBM cases. For the first time, we have 
constructed a single- cell transcriptomic atlas for GBM 
with CMV infection. Our findings indicate that CMV 
infection promotes the expansion of a subset of bipositive 
SOX2+CD68+ tumor- associated macrophages (TAMs). 
CMV manifests through mediating interactions between 
bipositive TAMs and novel identified immunosuppressive 
FXYD6+ T cells, leading to T- cell exhaustion and exac-
erbating the immune- suppressive microenvironment 
in GBM. Furthermore, we have developed CMV- T- cell 
receptor (TCR)- T cells, which demonstrated encour -
aging therapeutic effects when introduced into the GBM, 
providing a promising avenue for the treatment of GBM.
METHOD
Collection of tissue and blood samples
Relevant clinical information of the patients is succinctly 
presented in online supplemental table 1. Surgically 
resected GBM specimens were promptly placed on 
ice, ensuring a transfer time of no more than 30 min 
following lesion excision. Blood samples from patients 
were collected 1 day before the surgical procedure. The 
cohort of patients with GBM comprised 8 women and 12 
men, spanning an age range from 22 to 73 years. A total 
of 20 samples were analyzed in this study, encompassing 
20 tumor samples, and 20 patient blood samples.
Immune electron microscopy
The GBM tumor tissue, post- removal, is stored in immu-
noelectron microscopy fixative at 4°C, avoiding freezing 
during transportation. Immediate embedding and immu-
nolabeling tests are vital to prevent antigen loss. After 
washing the tissue blocks thrice with pre- cooled 0.1 M 
phosphate buffer (PB) (pH 7.4), resin penetration occurs 
in stages at 4°C, followed by embedding in London 
Resin (LR) white resin and polymerization at −20°C for 
48 hours. Ultrathin sections (70–80 nm) are cut from resin 
blocks on an ultra- microtome and then fished onto nickel 
grids. Immunolabeling involves multiple steps, including 
incubation with primary (Anti- Cytomegalovirus IE1/2, 
ab53495, Abcam; anti- HCMV- pp65, BIOSS, bs- 0271R) 
and secondary antibodies (Goat- anti- mouse IgG (HL)−4 
nm Gold, 115- 185- 146, Jackson; Goat- anti- rabbit IgG 
(HL)−10 nm Gold, G7402, Sigma), rinsing, staining, and 
drying the nickel grids in a controlled manner. Finally, 
observation under a transmission electron microscope 
(TEM) and image capture is conducted to identify 
positive signals, which appear as 4/10 nm black golden 
particles.
Droplet digital PCR for CMV copy number
Microdroplet preparation involves placing the genera-
tion chip in a holder, adding 40 µL microdroplet to the 
oil phase well, and introducing 20 µL PCR reaction water 
phase to the sample well. After dealing with the chip’s 
pad, it’s placed in the MicroDROP- 100A instrument for 
microdroplet formation. Once formed, transfer drop-
lets (45–55 µL) to a 96- well PCR plate. Seal the plate and 
puncture the film, then heat- seal it. Perform PCR within 
30 min. After PCR, use a MicroDROP- 100B biochip reader 
for detection. Preheat the detector for 30 min, insert the 
plate, and press the button for detection. Afterward, 
analyze results using Quant Drop software.
Immunohistochemistry
To assess the cell composition density and spatial posi-
tioning of bipositive SOX2+CD68+ TAMs in CMV- infected 
GBM, multiplex immunohistochemical (multi- IHC), and 
multispectral imaging were performed on formalin- fixed 
paraffin- embedded slides from 20 patients with GBM. 
The multi- IHC kit was used for staining specific cell 
markers, including CD68 (anti CD68 mAb,14- 0688- 82, 
Thermo Fisher), SOX2 (Anti- SOX2, #ab97959, Abcam), 
CMV- IE1/2 (Anti- Cytomegalovirus IE1/2, #ab53495, 
Abcam), TNF-β (Thermo fisher), FXYD6 (Santa Cruz), 
CD3 (CD3 Rabbit mAb, #49268, Signalway Antibody), 
KI67 (anti KI67, #P41816, ProMab Biotechnologies). 
After sequential application of primary antibodies, slides 
underwent incubation with secondary antibodies and 
tyramide signal amplification. Microwave heat- treated 
antigen retrieval was applied, and nuclei were stained 
with 4',6- diamidino- 2- phenylindole (DAPI). Multispectral 
images were obtained by scanning stained slides using the 
Mantra System (CaseViewer) across the fluorescence exci-
tation spectrum (420–720 nm). In addition, histological 
3
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access
staining and immunofluorescence staining of mice brain 
tissue used CD3 (Anti- CD3 mAb, #ab86883, Abcam), 
Hematoxylin and Eosin Staining Kit (Reedbio) and TdT- 
mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL, #afihc030, 
AiFang biological) Kit. InForm image analysis software 
(CaseViewer) performed multispectral unmixing using 
a spectral library created from auto- fluorescence and 
single- stained sections, resulting in reconstructed images 
with auto- fluorescence removed.
Flow cytometry
Cryopreserved single- cell suspensions from GBM tumor 
tissue (and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) 
for use as controls) were thawed. In the bipositive 
SOX2+CD68+ TAMs identification experiment, samples 
were stained for viability with Zombie NIR Fixable 
Viability Dye Kit (1:500 dilution, BioLegend, #423101) at 
25°C for 20 min in the dark. Samples were then washed 
in phosphate- buffered saline (PBS) supplemented with 
2% fetal bovine serum (FBS), before staining with a 
master mix of surface antibodies (Alexa Fluor 647 anti- 
human CD68 Antibody, BioLegend, #333820), and in 
PBS supplemented with 2% FBS at 25°C for 60 min in the 
dark. Appropriate antibody concentrations were deter -
mined previously by titration. FIX & PERM Cell Permea-
bilization Kit (Thermo Fisher, #GAS003) are intended for 
the fixation (Reagent A), permeabilization (Reagent B), 
and intracellular antibodies (Alexa Fluor 488 anti- SOX2 
Antibody, BioLegend, #656110) of the cells. Samples were 
washed with PBS supplemented with 2% FBS and resus-
pended in 1× stabilizing fixative for use in flow cytometry.
Tissue dissociation and preparation for single-cell RNA 
sequencing
The fresh tissues were preserved in the sCelLiVE Tissue 
Preservation Solution (Singleron) on ice within 30 min 
post- surgery. Following this, the specimens underwent 
a triple wash with Hanks Balanced Salt Solution, were 
minced into small pieces, and subsequently digested 
with 3 mL of sCelLiVE Tissue Dissociation Solution 
(Singleron) using the Singleron PythoN Tissue Dissocia-
tion System at 37°C for 15 min. The resulting cell suspen-
sion was collected and passed through a 40 micron sterile 
strainer. Next, GEXSCOPE red blood cell lysis buffer 
(RCLB, Singleron) was introduced to the cell suspen-
sion. This mixture, in a ratio of one part cell to two parts 
RCLB by volume, was incubated at room temperature for 
5–8 min to eliminate red blood cells. After incubation, 
the mixture underwent centrifugation at 300×g at 4°C for 
5 min to remove the supernatant. The remaining pellet 
was gently resuspended in PBS.
Single-cell RNA sequencing and data preprocessing
The single- cell RNA sequencing (scRNA- seq) libraries 
were prepared with the Chromium Single Cell 5′ Reagent 
Kit from the Chromium platform (10x Genomics), 
following the manufacturer’s guidelines. Sequencing 
was performed on the Illumina HiSeq X Ten platform. 
Preprocessing of PE150 Illumina sequencing reads was 
conducted using Cell Ranger software (V.7.0.0). Raw 
format reads were converted to FASTQ using “cellranger 
mkfastq”. Subsequently, reads in FASTQ format were 
aligned to the human genome reference (hg38, GRCh38) 
using STAR. The “cellranger count” tool was employed to 
generate gene expression matrices for each sample.
Quality control, dimension-reduction, and clustering
Cells were filtered by gene counts below 200 and the 
top 2% gene counts and the top 2% unique molecular 
identifier (UMI) counts. Cells with over 50% mitochon-
drial content were removed. Following the removal of 
low- quality and doublet cells, single cells were normal-
ized, 121,637 cells were retained for the downstream 
dimension reduction and clustering analyses. We applied 
principal component analyses to reduce the dimension-
ality of the data using the top 2,000 most variable genes 
in the data set. Computed principal components were 
batch corrected for variations between patients using 
the Harmony R package V.1.0. We used batch- corrected 
principal componets (PCs) as input for Louvain- based 
graphing and chose resolution parameters between 0.1 
and 1 depending on the single- cell data sets. Seurat was 
used to identify cluster- specific marker genes and visual-
ization with dot and feature plots.
scRNA-seq-based CNA detection
The InferCNV package was used to detect the copy number 
alterations (CNAs) in malignant cells (cancer cells). non- 
malignant cells were used as baselines to estimate the 
CNAs of malignant cells. Genes expressed in more than 
20 cells were sorted based on their loci on each chromo-
some. The relative expression values were centered to 1, 
using a 1.5 SD from the residual- normalized expression 
values as the ceiling. A slide window size of 101 genes was 
used to smoothen the relative expression on each chro-
mosome, to remove the effect of gene- specific expression.
Pathway enrichment analysis
To explore the potential functions of the differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs), Gene Ontology (GO) and 
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses 
were conducted using the “clusterProfiler” R package 
V.4.10.0.13 Pathways with an adjusted p value (p_adj) below 
0.05 were deemed significantly enriched. GO gene sets, 
encompassing molecular function, biological process, 
and cellular component categories, served as the refer -
ence. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was applied 
to assess the DEGs between two groups. Additionally, for 
Gene Set Variation Analysis (GSVA) pathway enrichment 
analysis, the average gene expression of each cell type was 
employed as input data, using the GSVA package.
Cell–cell interaction analysis
The R package CellChat V.1.6.114 was employed to quan-
titatively infer and analyze intercellular communica-
tion networks using our scRNAseq data. CellChat uses 
network analysis and pattern recognition approaches 
4
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access 
to predict major signaling inputs and outputs for cells, 
elucidating how cells and signals coordinate for various 
functions. This tool classifies signaling pathways, 
outlining both conserved and context- specific pathways 
through manifold learning and quantitative contrasts. 
CellChat calculates the communication probability of a 
ligand- receptor pair between two cell types using a law of 
mass action model. This calculation takes into account 
ligand and receptor concentrations, any known cofactor 
concentrations, and the number of cells in each cell type. 
The significance of the communication probability is 
determined by assessing whether it is statistically higher 
between the known cell types than between randomly 
permuted groups of cells.
Trajectory analysis
For the classification of a cell as a lymphocyte in the 
context of trajectory inference, a T cell was required to 
exhibit at least one UMI for each of the genes protein tyro-
sine phosphatase receptor type C (PTPRC/ CD45). After 
excluding B cells and natural killer cells, uniform mani-
fold approximation and projection (UMAP) was reap-
plied for dimensionality reduction. Post dimensionality 
reduction for both trajectories, hierarchical clustering 
was conducted on the UMAP coordinates. The Sling-
shot V.2.10.0 tool15 was used to fit a minimum spanning 
tree to these clusters, thereby determining the approxi-
mate trajectory structure. This piecewise linear trajectory 
underwent smoothing via simultaneous principal curves 
to derive the final trajectories and pseudotime values.
Comparison with published spatial transcriptomics and 
scRNA-seq data for GBM
The spatial transcriptomics data (processed Seurat 
object) of patients with GBM treated with anti- PD- 1/
PD- L1 treatment were downloaded from GSE235672 
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?  
acc=GSE235672.). The Published scRNA- seq data of low- 
grade gliomas (LGG), newly diagnosed glioblastomas 
(ndGBM), and recurrent glioblastomas (rGBM) from 
GSE182109 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/ 
acc.cgi?acc=GSE182109).
Bulk RNA-seq
The published bulk RNA- seq data of GBM matched 
survival information was downloaded from UCSC Xena 
(https://xenabrowser.net/datapages/). Raw reads were 
processed and quantification and identification of DEGs 
were performed using DEseq2.
The detection of HLA types
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) was detected by single- 
molecule real- time (SMRT) sequencing. A reaction 
mastermixture was prepared before use, which contained 
the 10 µL of reaction mix contained 4 µL of PCR product, 
5 µmol/L barcoded adaptor, 1×T4 DNA ligase buffer, 
1 mmol/L ATP, 200 µmol/L dNTP, 2.5 units of T4 polynu-
cleotide kinase, 0.75 units of T4 DNA polymerase and 180 
units of T4 DNA ligase (HC). The purified PCR product 
(120–250 ng) was mixed with the enzyme mixture. Reac-
tion mixes were then incubated at 37°C for 20 min, 25°C 
for 15 min, and 65°C for 10 min. Exonucleases I and III 
were then used to remove failed ligation products, and 
the pre- library was purified with Ampure PB beads. After 
pooling, the pre- libraries were purified twice more. The 
final library was bound with sequencing enzymes and 
primers using specific Pacific Biosciences kits, loaded 
with DNA- polymerase complexes, and sequenced on the 
Sequel II platform for 20 hours. The primary analysis of 
output data was carried out with SMRT Link V.10.1.0 soft-
ware. All HLA alleles were named according to the Inter-
national Society of Blood Transfusion working group 
that develops and maintains guidelines for blood group 
antigen and allele nomenclature.
TCR analysis
TCR analysis involved enriching full- length TCR V(D)J 
segments from 5′ library- amplified complementary DNA 
via PCR using the Chromium Single- Cell V(D)J Enrich-
ment kit (10x Genomics). Cell Ranger vdj pipeline assem-
bled TCR sequences, identifying CDR3 sequences and 
rearranged TCR genes. Loupe V(D)J Browser V.2.0.1 (10x 
Genomics) facilitated analysis. Some T cells exhibited the 
same TCR with two α and/or two β chains. Four TCR 
forms (1α1β, 1α2β, 2α1β, and 2α2β) were considered, 
treating the same TCR form with one class, resulting in 
a unique TCR name. The TCR diversity metric, encom-
passing clonotype frequency and barcode information, 
was derived for analysis.
Grouping of Lymphocyte Interactions with Paratope Hotspots 
2 algorithm
The GLIPH2 (Grouping of Lymphocyte Interactions with 
Paratope Hotspots 2) algorithm functions by grouping 
lymphocyte interactions based on complementary para-
tope hotspots.16 It dissects highly diverse TCR sequences 
into shared specific groups that may recognize the same 
peptide- major histocompatibility complex ligand. These 
shared specific groups are established through strong 
homology within the same amino acid sequence motif 
or complementarity determining region 3 (CDR3) of the 
TCRβ chain. Prediction of shared CDR3 sequences using 
the GLIPH2 algorithm: Amplified TCR or B cell receptor 
(BCR) sequences are input into the system, and the 
GLIPH2 algorithm is used for analysis. TCR sequences 
are grouped and clustered, and shared CDR3 sequences 
are identified, resulting in the generation of visualized 
outcomes.
Generation of TCR-T cells
We designed a gRNA to target the first exon of the constant 
chain of the TCRα gene (TRAC). The sequence targeted 
is located upstream of the transmembrane domain of 
the TCRα. This domain is required for the TCRα and β 
assembly and addressing to the cell surface. Both, non- 
homologous end joining and integration of the TCR by 
homology directed repair (HDR) at this locus would then 
5
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access
efficiently disrupt the TCR complex. In the process of 
gene targeting, primary T cells are isolated from periph-
eral blood by lymphocyte isolation fluid in patients. T- cell 
activation was initiated, and 48 hours later, the CD3/
CD28 beads were magnetically removed. Subsequently, T 
cells underwent transfection through electrotransfer of 
Cas9 mRNA and gRNA using the NEPA21 system from 
the NEPA GENE apparatus. A mixture of 1×10 6 cells, 
1.6 µL(25 pmol/µL) of Cas9, 1.2 µL(100 pmol/µL) of 
gRNA, and 4 µg of dsDNA (TCR) were electroporated 
in a Nepa Electroporation Cuvettes (NEPA GENE, #EC- 
002S). Following electroporation, cells were diluted into 
the culture medium and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. 
The culture is 2–4 hours post- electroporation (1×10 5 to 
1×106). Transduced T cells were cultured with replaced 
fresh medium and IL- 2 (Recombinant Human Interleu-
kin- 2, PrimeGene, GMP- 101–02) every 3 days edited cells 
were then cultured under standard conditions at 37°C 
and expanded in T- cell growth medium, with regular 
replenishment to maintain a density of approximately 
1×106 cells per ml every 2–3 days. For a more in- depth 
understanding of targeting constructs and strategies, 
TRAC gRNA and dsDNA(TCR) sequence, refer to figure 
5F.
Co-culture U251 and TCR-T cell in vitro
A total of 6×10 5 CMV- TCR- T cells/untransduced (UTD) 
T cells were co- cultured with an equivalent number 
of mixed U251- GFP- Luci- Vector cells (derived from a 
human glioma cell line and engineered with a green 
fluorescent protein and luciferase vector, previously 
constructed by our laboratory), were infected with CMV 
(Strain AD169, sourced from the Microbial Virus Strain 
Bank of Central South University). This co- culture took 
place at 37°C for 16 hours in Roswell Park Memorial 
Institute (RPMI) 1640, supplemented with L- glutamine 
(2 mM), antibiotics (penicillin 100 U/mL, streptomycin 
100 µg/mL), and 10% FBS. Brefeldin A (10 µg/mL 
#420601, BioLegend) was added 4 hours before harvest. 
Following incubation, cells were washed twice with PBS 
containing 1% FBS, then stained with CD3 (BV421 
Mouse Anti- Human CD3), CD8 (PerCP/Cyanine5.5 anti- 
human CD8a, BioLegend, #301032) and Zombie NIR 
Fixable Viability Dye Kit at 4°C for 30 min. After washing 
and fixation using the FIX & PERM Cell Permeabiliza-
tion Kit (Thermo Fisher, #GAS003), cells were further 
stained with interferon (IFN)-γ (APC Mouse Anti- Human 
IFN-γ Antibody, BioLegend, #506510) for 45 min at 4°C. 
After two additional washes, cell analysis was conducted 
using an FACS flow cytometer, and FlowJo software was 
employed for data analysis.
Intracranial in situ tumorigenic mice models
All animal experiments were approved by the Animal 
Care and Use Committee of Central South University. 
U251- GFP- Luci- Vector cells infected with CMV were 
harvested during the logarithmic growth phase, washed 
twice with PBS, and then loaded into a 50 µL syringe with 
a 25- gage needle attachment. Using a stereotactic frame 
for precision, the tumor cells were implanted 2 mm to 
the right of bregma, at a depth of 4 mm from the surface 
of the skull at the coronal suture. Resuspended at 5×10 5 
cells in 5 µL of serum- free medium per mouse. In mouse 
models, effector cells were systematically infused via tail 
vein injection in a 100 µL volume. Each mouse in the 
corresponding groups received an intravenous transplant 
of 2×107 CMV TCR- T cells or UTD T cells. Simultaneously, 
interleukin (IL)- 2 (1×10 6 U per mouse) was intraperi-
toneally injected. Tumor progression was longitudinally 
monitored by assessing bioluminescence emission using a 
BLT AniView100 optical imaging system after intraperito-
neal substrate injection.
Statistical analysis
In scRNA- seq data, cell distribution comparisons between 
two groups were evaluated through unpaired two- tailed 
Wilcoxon rank- sum tests. For comparisons of gene 
expression or gene signature between two groups of 
cells, unpaired two- tailed Student’s t- tests were employed. 
Paired two- tailed Wilcoxon rank- sum tests were used for 
the analysis of cell distribution within paired cell types. All 
statistical analyses and data presentations were conducted 
using R. The specific statistical tests applied in the figures 
were delineated in the figure legends. Statistical signifi-
cance was defined at p<0.05.
For statistical analysis of other experimental, data are 
presented as the mean±SD from at least three separate 
experiments, and the data were analyzed using GraphPad 
Prism V.9.5 Differences between the variables of the two 
groups were tested using the Student’s t- test, and one- way 
analysis of variance was used to evaluate the differences 
among variables of multiple groups. Survival analysis was 
calculated by the Kaplan- Meier method. Values of p<0.05 
were considered statistically significant.
RESULTS
CMV infection induces bipositive CD68+SOX2+ TAMs to 
remodel GBM immune microenvironment through scRNA-seq
We combined immunogold electron microscopy with 
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) to assess CMV viral parti-
cles and DNA in fresh postoperative tumor tissue for 
confirmed 20 patients with GBM (online supplemental 
figure S1A). The rare electron- dense particles labeled 
with gold were confirmed that be morphologically consis-
tent with CMV virions (figure 1A); the low viral copy 
numbers were displayed in 60% of tissues of patients with 
GBM (12/20) by ddPCR detection (online supplemental 
figure S1B). The clinical details of these patients are 
summarized in online supplemental table 1.
Next, a comprehensive exploration of the functional 
and transcriptional diversity in CMV- infected GBM tissues 
was performed by scRNA- seq. After initial quality control 
and filtering, transcriptomic data were available for 
121,637 cells from GBMs including CMV- infected GBMs 
(CMV+, n=6) and CMV- uninfected GBMs (CMV −, n=3). 
6
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access 
Figure 1 CMV infection triggers bipositive TAMs- driven remodeling of the GBM immune microenvironment. (A) Transmission 
electron microscopy images of CMV- infected GBMs. Scale bars respectively, 5 μm 1 µm 500 nm. The red arrows are pp65 at 
10 nm. green arrows are IE1/2 at 4 nm, and the white box shows electron- dense particles. (B) The UMAP above shows the 
composition of the annotated cells, with different colors representing different cell populations. The below is the CMV infected 
map, and the dark blue is the CMV infected. (C) The dot plot shows the expression levels of different classical cell marker genes 
in annotated cell populations. (D) UMAP feature plot representation of marker gene expression within individually identified 
macrophage and cancer cell populations and phenotypic states. (E) Representative images of multiplex immunofluorescence 
staining in formalin- fixed paraffin- embedded tissues, indicating CD68+SOX2+ TAMs, in paired CMV+ and CMV− samples. Scale 
bar, 200 µm and 50 µm. Boxplots illustrating the fraction of CD68+SOX2+ TAMs in CMV− (light blue) and CMV+(deep blue), 
respectively. Box center lines, bounds of the box, and whiskers indicate medians, first and third quartiles, and minimum and 
maximum values within 1.5×IQR of the box limits, respectively. Significance was determined using a two- sided, unpaired 
Wilcoxon rank- sum test relative to CMV+ (n = 12) for CMV− (n=8, p value<0.0001). (F) Representative flow cytometry plots 
and summary data showing the percentage of cellular staining for CD68+SOX2+ TAMs in CMV− and CMV+ GBM (n=20). CMV, 
cytomegalovirus; GBM, glioblastomas; TAM, tumor- associated macrophages; UMAP , uniform manifold approximation and 
projection.
7
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access
Using known lineage markers, we identified seven major 
cell populations, including cancer cells, macrophages, 
stromal cells, oligodendrocytes, endothelial cells, and 
T cells (figure 1B and online supplemental table 2). In 
the GBM landscape, we observed chromosome 7 ampli-
fication and chromosome 10 loss specifically in glioma 
cells, which was consistent with published whole- exome 
sequencing data for gliomas (online supplemental figure 
S1C). We found a novel cell type: bipositive TAMs (Bipos-
itive TAMs) co- expressing markers of both macrophages 
and tumor cells, which were relatively specific in patients 
with CMV+ GBM (figure 1C, online supplemental figure 
S1D). We excluded the effect of common molecular 
features on cellular compartmentalization (eg, TP53 
mutation and MGMT methylation status) (online supple-
mental figure S1E,F). We scored our single- cell data using 
the gene set (COATES_MACROPHAGE_M1_VS_M2_
UP) from GSEA, and the results showed that bipositive 
TAMs were more biased towards M1- type macrophages 
(online supplemental figure S2A). However, the polar -
ization of the characterized genetically analyzed macro-
phages was not obvious (online supplemental figure S2B). 
By analyzing the expression levels of classical markers 
of macrophages and tumor cells, we found that CD68 
and SOX2 were more significantly expressed in bipos-
itive TAMs (figure 1D). Intriguingly, immunofluores-
cence and flow cytometry detection indicated that GBM 
tissues infected with CMV are enriched with bipositive 
CD68+SOX2+ TAMs (figure 1E,F, online supplemental 
figure S2C), suggesting that CD68 and SOX2 serve as a 
reliable marker for bipositive TAMs. The functional anal-
ysis revealed that differentially expressed genes in biposi-
tive TAMs and T cells were predominantly associated with 
human CMV infection and viral protein interaction with 
cytokine and cytokine receptor pathways (online supple-
mental figure S2D,E). These results suggested that CMV 
infection remodels the GBM immune microenvironment 
through bipositive CD68+SOX2+ TAMs.
Bipositive TAMs are major contributors to the clinical outcome 
of GBMs
To better understand the functional characteristics of 
bipositive TAMs, we conducted a meticulous re- anno-
tation analysis of the published scRNA- seq data from 
glioma tumor tissue, which encompassed 44 segments 
obtained from 18 patients with glioma, comprising 2 
LGG, 11 ndGBM, and 5 rGBM. This data set comprehen-
sively covered eight major cell types, namely cancer cells 
macrophages, oligodendrocytes, endothelial, stromal 
cells, and so on. Bipositive TAMs were reproducibly found 
in these patients with glioma (figure 2A,B). Functional 
analysis revealed that the differential genes of bipositive 
TAMs were mainly enriched in the human CMV infection 
pathway (figure 2C, online supplemental figure S2F).
To assess the correlation of bipositive TAMs with the 
clinical progression of patients with glioma, we analyzed 
the percentage of type of cells in the tumor tissue. Anal-
ysis of the percentage of each cell type in patient tumor 
tissue indicated that we observed more pronounced 
heterogeneity in cell composition in ndGBM (figure 2D). 
In comparison to ndGBM, rGBM displays lower spatial 
heterogeneity and a less complex array of cellular compo-
nents within the tumor region. Notably, we found bipos-
itive TAMs were prevalent at the disease stage of glioma 
progression and particularly prominent in patients with 
GBM (figure 2E, online supplemental figure S2G). Bipos-
itive TAMs potentially originate from the fusion of macro-
phages engulfing tumor cells in the early stage of disease 
progression (LGG), and the number of cells is relatively 
more, but bipositive TAM cells may form tumor cells with 
the progression of the disease to late stage (GBM). We 
sought to determine which cells carried the most prog-
nostic information, only bipositive TAMs signatures 
displayed to be an independent prognostic factor by 
multivariate analyses (figure 2F). Kaplan- Meier survival 
analyses showed that the more the bipositive TAMs infil-
tration, the shorter were overall survival of patients with 
GBM (figure 2G). These results suggested that bipositive 
TAMs might act as a pointer of GBM progression. Taken 
together, these data collectively suggest that bipositive 
TAMs, which are associated with CMV infection gene 
expression programs, played a significant role in shaping 
the progression of GBM.
CMV infection enhances a novel immunosuppressive FXYD6+ 
T cell and facilitates GBM progression
To decipher how bipositive TAMs drive the tumor progres-
sion, we used a public repository of ligand- receptor inter-
actions, CellChat V.1.6.0, to infer interactions between 
bipositive TAMs, cancer cells, and all T populations in 
our scRNA- seq data. First, seven lymphocyte subpopula-
tions were classified by differential gene expression and 
examination of known lineage markers (figure 3A, online 
supplemental figure S3A), in which five T- cell clusters 
across tumor samples were identified, each with unique 
signature genes (online supplemental figure S3B). Specif-
ically, the central memory T cells were characterized by 
high expression of the IL- 7R and CD40LG genes. The 
T regulatory cells highly expressed the genes encoding 
inhibitory FOXP3, CTLA- 4, and IL- 2R, while effector T 
cells demonstrated high expression of cytotoxic cytokines 
such as CD8A/B, GZMH, and NKG7 genes (figure 3B).
Thrillingly, we discovered a cluster of T cells that was 
characterized by high expression of FXYD6, LSAMP, 
MEG3, and NCAM1 genes. We define it as FXYD6+ T cells, 
detailed FXYD6 + T cells characteristic genes are shown 
in online supplemental table 3. Compared with other T 
cells, FXYD6+ T cells highly expressed the related genes 
of cell cycling, gliogenesis development cell growth, 
and differentiation, such as MDK, ASCL1, SOX10, and 
SOX11 (figure 3C, online supplemental figure S3C), GO 
terms enriched in FXYD6 + T cells were associated with 
regulation of microtubule polymerization or depolym-
erization and regulation of nervous system development 
(figure 3D). These results suggested that FXYD6 + T cells 
supported the gain- promoting gliogenesis, which was 
8
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access 
Figure 2 Bipositive TAMs significantly influence the clinical outcomes of GBMs. (A) UMAP plot of 236,575 cells from tumor 
tissue samples of patients with glioma from GSE182109 data. Each cluster is shown in a different color. (B) Violin plots showing 
the expression levels of different classical cell marker genes in the 8 cell clusters. (C) Radargram demonstrating Gene Ontology 
analysis associated with infection by pathogenic organisms. (D) The bar graph shows the percentage of each cell population 
in each sample in single- cell RNA sequencing (E) Box plot showing the percentage of different cell populations in low- grade 
gliomas (LGG), newly diagnosed glioblastomas (ndGBM), and recurrent glioblastomas (rGBM) (F) Comparison of the signatures 
of each cell type gene multivariable Cox regression was used to obtain the HRs (with Wald 95% CIs shown as horizontal bars, 
and p values given on the right) based on the cross- validated prognostic scores derived using the Cox model and applied 
to pairwise differences of expression of the genes. (G) Kaplan- Meier plot of cross- validated macrophage prognostic score 
from (F) at 50% cut- off, showing the genes with opposite effects selected by the model. GBM, glioblastomas; RNA- seq, RNA 
sequencing; TAMs, tumor- associated macrophages; t- SNE, t- distributed stochastic neighbor embedding; UMAP , uniform 
manifold approximation and projection.
9
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access
Figure 3 CMV infection amplifies a newly identified immunosuppressive FXYD6+ T cell, promoting the progression of GBM. 
(A) Distribution and expression of representative genes in lymphocyte clusters. (B) Violin plots showing the expression levels of 
different classical lymphocyte marker genes in the seven cell clusters. (C) Gene network diagram showing functional analysis 
of FXYD6+ T cells characterized genes. (D) Gene function network diagram demonstrating the analysis of the major functions 
of the FXYD6+ T cells signature gene cluster. (E) Over- represented GO terms of FXYD6+ T cells (pink) compared with other T 
cells (violet). (F) The inferred MDK signaling networks between cancer cells/ bipositive TAMs and T- cell clusters. (G) Expression 
score of the FXYD6+ T cells gene sets of non- responder and responder after neoadjuvant anti- PD- 1 therapy. (H) Representative 
example of CMV− (G15) and CMV + (G3) GBM tumors. Tumor staining by multiplexed immunofluorescence shows the spatial 
distributions of FXYD6+ T cells, KI67+ cancer cells (tumor cell proliferation), and TNF-β (T- cell cytotoxicity). (I) Circos plots 
showing well- known ligand- receptor pairs from CellChat databases under the requirement that either the ligand or the receptor 
(or both) both being expressed. Arrows are pointing from the ligand toward the receptors. Different colors represent different 
cells, and the width is proportional to the number of events. Only selected example pairs are labeled and highlighted for the 
network. P values are adjusted for the number of cell types. CMV, cytomegalovirus; GBM, glioblastomas; PD- 1, programmed 
death 1; TAM, tumor- associated macrophages; UMAP , uniform manifold approximation and projection.
10
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access 
different from the reported proliferating T cells; mean-
while, FXYD6+ T cells the majority of genes defining the 
GO term “positive regulation of immune system process” 
and “T cell mediated cytotoxicity” was downregulated in 
FXYD6+ T cells compared with other T cells (figure 3E), 
which suggested FXYD6+ T cells induce immunosuppres-
sion. It is not characterized by high expression of corre-
sponding immunosuppressive molecules, like PDCD1, 
CTLA- 4, TIGIT, LAG3, and BTLA, etc (online supple-
mental figure S3D), so, FXYD6 + T cells are a group of 
T cells which is different from the classical exhausted T 
cells. In summary, FXYD6 + T cells are a group of novel 
immunosuppressive T cells.
Subsequently, we performed the analysis of the inter -
actions between bipositive TAMs, cancer cells, and all T 
populations in our scRNA- seq data. Compared with the 
uninfected group, we found that CMV infection altered 
interactions between bipositive TAMs, cancer cells, and T 
cells, primarily mediated via the MDK (Midkine) pathway 
(online supplemental figure S3E), in which either the 
cell–cell interactions of cancer cells and T cells or bipos-
itive TAMs and T cells mainly focus on FXYD6 + T cells 
(figure 3F). We next analyzed data from published 
spatial transcriptome. 17 Analysis of the co- localization 
FXYD6+ T cells signature in spatial transcriptome data 
showed increased FXYD6+ T cells signatures in anti- PD- 1/
anti- PD- L1 treatment no responder patients with GBM 
(figure 3G). Multiplex IHC showed that FXYD6 +CD3+ 
cells were numerically higher in patient with CMV+ GBM 
samples than in patient with CMV − GBM samples. Mean-
while, patients with concurrent CMV infection showed 
more tumor cell proliferation and less T- cell toxicity 
(figure 3H, online supplemental figure S3F). In addi-
tion, we found more clues about interactions between 
FXYD6+ T cells and cancer cells. We detected the neuro-
trophic factors MDK and pleiotrophin (PTN) in cancer 
cells. PTN and MDK are involved in inducing and stim-
ulating neuronal differentiation. Receptor protein tyro-
sine phosphatase type Z 1 (PTPRZ1) and nucleolin 
(NCL), a shared receptor of MDK and PTN, were highly 
expressed in FXYD6 + T cells (figure 3I). The binding of 
MDK to PTPRZ1 is important for the MDK- dependent 
survival of embryonic neurons.18 The interaction of PTN 
with PTPRZ1 is known to play an important role in cell–
cell adhesion, cell motility, migration, cell division, and 
promoted glioblastoma stem cells (GSC) proliferation 
and self- renewal.19 In short, in GBM with CMV infection, 
the interactions of cancer cells and FXYD6 + T cells via 
ligand- receptor binding MDK and PTN with PTPRZ1/
NCL mediated the tumor immunosuppressive microenvi-
ronment and promoted GBM progression.
CMV infection increased T-cell exhaustion in GBM
To better understand the changes in T cells in patients 
with CMV+ GBM, each type of T cell was found in indi-
vidual patient tissues (figure 4A,B). We found that most 
T cells in CMV- infected GBM tumors were IL- 7R+ T cells 
(46.3%), while CMV- uninfected were GZMH + T cells 
(57.7%) (figure 4C,D). We used Slingshot for trajectory 
inference with markers PTPRC/CD45, CD3D, and CD3E 
(online supplemental figure S4A). The analysis produced 
a two- lineage trajectory, with one terminal point to 
FOXP3+ T cells and another to FXYD6 + T cells. We first 
observed that the position of individual cells along the 
trajectory (ie, in pseudotime) varied largely according to 
their CMV infection. T cells from CMV − tissue localized 
almost entirely in the early portion of the trajectory, while 
CMV- infected tumors were heavily skewed toward the 
ends of the trajectory (online supplemental figure S4B). 
We have referred to the article published by Carrasco et 
al20 to analyze the hallmarks of T- cell aging in our data to 
validate the accuracy of the starting/ending point of the 
trajectory (see online supplemental figure S4C). Through 
differential gene expression analysis, numerous inhibi-
tory checkpoints had increased expression in T cells from 
CMV+ GBM tumors compared with the CMV− GBM. Their 
expression, including PDCD1/PD- 1, HAVCR2/TIM- 3, 
and LAG3, was substantially increased late in pseudotime 
(figure 4E,F). Their expression levels which are associated 
with a more terminally exhausted phenotype were consis-
tently low throughout pseudotime (figure 4G), poten-
tially explaining the low efficacy of immune checkpoint 
inhibitors in GBM. The trajectory analysis indicates that 
T cells were predominantly enriched in the later stage of 
the trajectory in CMV + GBM, suggesting that CMV infec-
tion drives T- cell exhaustion, and potentially interferes 
with the response to inhibitor treatment.
Identifying clonally expanded TCRs in patients with GBM with 
CMV infection
We further explored whether T cells could generate 
specific activated TCR in CMV- infected GBM tumor 
microenvironment. We investigated the TCR of T cells in 
CMV+ GBM and uninfected tissue by performing single- 
cell TCR/BCR sequencing (scTCR/BCR- seq) on the cells 
for which we had transcriptome data, enabling a linkage 
between clone type and phenotype (figure 5A). We sought 
to determine the antigens that drive the clonal expansion 
of T cells in the tissue of patients with CMV infection 
(figure 5B). Conspicuously, patients with CMV+ GBM have 
more TCR clones, especially in CD8+ and GZMH+ T cells 
(online supplemental figure S5A,B). We next compared 
CMV infected TCR clone type with the uninfected 
(defined as the percentage of total TCRαβ sequences that 
are identical to one or more TCRαβ sequences), which 
revealed that the levels of TRBV4- 3 were higher in CMV- 
infected GBMs (figure 5C, online supplemental figure 
S5C–E). To identify the primary clinical beneficiaries 
of our CMV- TCR- T cell immunotherapy, we conducted 
single- molecule real- time sequencing for high- resolution 
HLA typing on 10 patients (online supplemental table 
4). We applied the GLIPH2.0 (Grouping of Lymphocyte 
Interactions by Paratope Hotspots) algorithm to analyze 
our TCR sequences and define specificity groups that 
are shared by TCRs. Notably, GLIPH identified a shared 
TCRβ (TRBV4- 3) chain between patients with CMV 
11
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access
infected (CASSPGTGSYEQYF), which shared homology 
with a TCRβ chain from another CMV infected patient 
(CASSPGSGSYEQYF) (figure 5D). To test for antigen 
specificity of GLIPH- derived TCRs, we generated a T cell 
termed TCRαβ from these patients with GBM with CMV 
infected (online supplemental figure S5F). We used a 
strategy to replace the endogenous TCR using non- viral 
Figure 4 T cells profile in glioblastomas with CMV infection. (A) The UMAP shows the composition of the T cells, with different 
colors representing different T- cell populations. (B) UMAP representation from colored based on patient ID. (C) The bar shows 
the percentage of T- cell subsets comparing CMV- infected and CMV- uninfected groups. (D) Bar graph showing the percentage 
of T- cell subsets in patients. (E) Distribution and expression of exhaustion- related genes in T cells in the CMV- uninfected 
group. (F) Distribution and expression of exhaustion- related genes in T cells in the CMV- infected group. (G) Slingshot trajectory 
analysis demonstrates the average expression pattern of each gene and signature across pseudotime (scaled from minimum to 
maximum average expression for each gene). CMV, cytomegalovirus; UMAP , uniform manifold approximation and projection.
12
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access 
Figure 5 Identification of clonally expanded T- cell receptors in patients with CMV- infected GBM. (A) UMAP showing the 
concentration of clonal cells in locations of T- cell clusters paired a- b TCRs were detected in T cells (n=9 subjects per group). 
(B) UMAP shows the composition of T cells colored by cluster. The deep blue dot shows CMV + GBMs. (C) Grouped differential 
TCR-β sequences with genes in the horizontal coordinate and the frequency of use percentage of the V genes of the TCR in 
the vertical coordinate, with different colors indicating different groups. (D) Schematic diagram of Grouping of Lymphocyte 
Interactions with Paratope Hotspots 2 results, the larger and redder the nodes are the more core, and the thicker and redder 
the connecting lines between the nodes represent more similar CDR3 sequences. Note: The global pattern contains the “%!” 
symbol to indicate that variation is allowed at that position. (E) TCR substitutes CMV- TCR sequences for HDR templates of 
endogenous TCR with the CRISPR/Cas9 editing system. (F) Detection of gene editing in CMV- TCR by PCR- restriction fragment 
length polymorphism. CMV, cytomegalovirus; GBM, glioblastomas; HDR, homology directed repair; TCR, T- cell receptors; 
UMAP , uniform manifold approximation and projection.
13
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access
genome targeting to integrate an approximately 1.5 kb 
DNA cassette into the first exon of the TCRα constant 
region (TRAC) (figure 5E). Cas9 ribonucleoprotein 
(Cas9 RNP) was co- electroporated with a dsDNA HDR 
template designed, we observed that the primary cell was 
successful in introducing the TCR sequence (figure 5F, 
online supplemental table 5).
CMV-TCR-T cells are effective against orthotopic GBM in mice 
models
Finally, we assessed the effect of CMV- TCR- T cells on 
GBM cells in vitro and in vivo. When CMV- TCR- T cells 
were co- cultured with U251- GFP cells for 36 hours, we 
found that CMV- TCR- T cells maintained the capacity 
to efficiently lyse tumor cells through T cells mediated 
cytotoxicity (figure 6A). We assessed the cytotoxicity 
of CMV- TCR- T cells against tumor cells induced with 
CMV infection compared with UTD cells at varied 
effector- to- target ratios. Our results demonstrate that 
CMV- TCR- T cells exhibit significantly higher killing 
efficiency against tumor cells compared with the 
UTD group (figure 6B). Meanwhile, CMV- TCR- T cells 
exhibited selective activation against GBM by specifi-
cally producing IFN-γ . By contrast, we did not detect 
T- cell activation in cells containing either UTD cells 
(figure 6C,D, online supplemental figure S5G).
We wanted to know whether the in vivo efficacy of 
TCR- T cells was dependent on TCR recognition of its 
antigen or whether secreted were sufficient to achieve 
measurable antitumor responses in vivo. To test this 
hypothesis, we topically implanted human GBM cells 
(U251) into NOD- scid IL 2Rγnull  (NSG) mice and 
proceeded with an intraventricular injection of CMV-  
TCR- T cells (figure 6E). U251 has been cited for its 
ability to most closely reflect the salient pathobio-
logical features of human GBM when implanted in 
mice. Using this model, we demonstrated durable 
regression of established GBM following injection 
with CMV TCR- T cells. Conversely, mice treated 
with UTD T- cells demonstrated progressive tumor 
burden (figure 6F). Finally, we confirmed that non-  
viral genome targeting could be used to generate 
TCR cells and that these CMV- TCR- T cells have in 
vivo antitumor functions. Adoptive transfer of sorted 
CMV- TCR- T cells also reduced the tumor burden 
in treated animals (figure 6G). Further histological 
analyses of brain sections revealed that mice treated 
with CMV- TCR- T cells developed significantly smaller 
GBM tumors compared with the UTD T cells group 
and control group. Moreover, immunofluorescence 
studies demonstrated the localization of CD3 + cells 
and TUNEL + cells in the mouse tumor tissue. Notably, 
the CMV- TCR- T cells group exhibited a higher number 
of CD3 + cells and TUNEL + cells compared with the 
UTD T cells group or control group (figure 6H). 
Altogether, CMV- TCR- T cells constructed from CMV 
infected effectively inhibit the growth of GBM.
DISCUSSION
GBM, the most prevalent and lethal malignant brain 
tumor, is known for its systemic immunosuppression 
and poor response to current immunotherapies. 21 
Therefore, it is crucial to have a comprehensive under -
standing of the mechanisms behind immunosuppression 
to develop effective immunotherapy strategies for GBM. 
Recent studies have consistently linked CMV infection 
to GBM, and CMV has been found to activate growth 
signals, prevent cell death, enhance cell movement and 
invasion,22 trigger abnormal blood vessel formation, and 
influence the tumor microenvironment. 23 In this study, 
we conducted single- cell transcriptomic analysis to map 
the landscape of CMV infection in GBM. Our results 
show that CMV primarily induces immunosuppression 
and facilitates tumor cell growth by mediating crosstalk 
between bipositive TAMs and FXYD6 + T cells during 
GBM progression. Additionally, CMV infection within 
GBM leads to increased expression of immune check-
point proteins, highlighting the substantial role of CMV 
in driving immunosuppression. Based on this under -
standing, we developed a CMV- TCR- T cellular therapy 
targeting CMV, which demonstrated enhanced efficacy in 
eliminating tumor cells.
Our study reports for the first time that bipositive TAMs, 
co- expressing both macrophage and tumor cell charac-
teristics, are enriched to promote immunosuppression 
in patients with CMV + GBM. Bipositive cells that express 
macrophage and tumor cell markers have been docu-
mented in various malignancies, including GBM, 24 mela-
noma, colon adenocarcinoma,25 and ovarian cancer.26 Wu 
et al reported that double- positive TAMs in GBM exhibit 
heightened immunosuppressive activity compared with 
normal TAMs, with cell fusion being the dominant mech-
anism for the formation of these bipositive cells, while 
phagocytosis contributes to tumor invasion, metastasis, 
and progression.27 According to Pallett et al 28 reported, 
like- T cells are a group of cell subsets that express both 
T cells and monocytes (CD14 +CD8+ T cells), preferen-
tially accumulate within the donor pool in liver allografts, 
among tumor- infltrating responses and hepatic virus- 
specific, and in cirrhotic ascites, which have high constitu-
tive production of the immunoprotective cytokine IL- 10, 
mount rapid and potent effector function after TCR 
engagement, and switch to chemotactic/hepatoprotec-
tive function after LPS exposure. Interestingly, the bipos-
itive CD68+SOX2+ TAMs we identified were localized at 
tumor junctions, which is consistent with the presence of 
immunosuppressed TAMs at the margins of gliomas that 
have been reported, 29 which further confirms that CMV 
infection leads to immunosuppression through bipositive 
TAMs.
Previous studies have suggested that the beneficial 
effects of PD- 1/PD- L1 are limited to a few patients with 
GBM.30 In this study, we newly discovered FXYD6+ T cells, 
a type of immune- suppressive T cell, which is reported by 
us for the first time in GBM. FXYD6 + T cells are highly 
enriched in patients with GBM who did not respond to 
14
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access 
Figure 6 CMV- TCR- T demonstrates efficacy against orthotopic glioblastomas in murine models. (A) CMV- TCR- T cells co- 
cultured with U251- GFP- Luci (HLA- A*0201) after flow cytometric detection of T- cell proliferation. (B) Flow cytometry cytotoxicity 
assay of UTD cells, sorted CMV- TCR- T cells against U251- GFP- Luci at indicated efficiency- to- target (E/T) ratios over 24 hours. 
(C) Flow cytometry detection of apoptotic tumor cells after co- culture of CMV- TCR- T cells and U251 after flow cytometric. 
(D) Cytokine production by primary human UTD, CMV- TCR- T cells when co- cultured overnight with U251 at an E/T of 1:3. 
(E) Schematic representation of experimental design in which a heterogeneous population (CMV +) of U251 glioma cells was 
implanted orthotopically into the brains of NSG mice. Both U251 were modified with luci allowing for visualization of total 
intracranial tumor burden by bioluminescent imaging. Mice were treated intraventricularly on day 30 postimplantation with 
UTD cells or CMV- TCR- T cells. (F) Bioluminescence analysis of mixed tumor growth over time, n= 5. (G) The mice body weight 
is displayed for individual mice and as average values (n=5, mean+SD is depicted; unpaired, two- tailed t- test, ***p< 0.001). 
(H) Hematoxylin and immunofluorescence staining for CD3 (T cells) and apoptotic cells identified by TdT- mediated dUTP nick 
end labeling (TUNEL) in tumor specimens from mice treated with intravenous CMV- TCR- T cells or UDT cells (scale bar, 20 µm). 
APC, allophycocyanin; CMV, cytomegalovirus; FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanate; IFN, interferon; PBS, phosphate- buffered saline; 
UTD, untransduced; TCR, T- cell receptor.
15
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access
anti- PD- 1/anti- PD- L1 treatment immunotherapy. Our 
results elucidate that its main function is to promote 
the growth of GBM cells while inhibiting the immune 
activity of T cells. Immune checkpoint inhibitors, such 
as anti- PD- 1/PD- L1, have demonstrated significant effi-
cacy in various tumors. 31 However, it has been suggested 
that patients with GBM do not benefit from PD- 1/PD- L1 
inhibitors in terms of survival, which is primarily due 
to the low expression levels of PD- 1 in GBM. 32 Notably, 
reduced T- cell activity has also been observed in the 
GBM microenvironment, suggesting the presence of a 
specific T- cell failure mechanism in GBM. FXYD6+ T cells 
are precisely the key entry point for addressing T- cell 
immunosuppression in GBM. FXYD6, the FXYD domain- 
containing ion transport regulator 6, has been reported 
to affect the activity of Na +/K+- ATPase and be associated 
with mental diseases, 33 such as Alzheimer’s disease and 
schizophrenia.34 Our results also highlight that the inter -
action between bipositive TAMs or cancer cells and T 
cells is predominantly focused on FXYD6 + T cells rather 
than regulatory T cells (Tregs). The strong interactions 
between cancer cells and FXYD6 + T cells via ligand- 
receptor binding of PTN- PTPRZ1 and MDK- NCL induce 
the formation of tumor immunosuppressive microenvi-
ronment, thereby promoting GBM progression. Addition-
ally, neurotrophic factors MDK and PTN are involved in 
inducing and stimulating neuronal differentiation.18 The 
PTN- PTPRZ1 signaling axis plays a pivotal role in facil-
itating cell–cell adhesion, 35 promoting cell migration, 36 
regulating cell division, as well as enhancing proliferation 
and self- renewal of GSC. 19 The MDK- NCL interaction 
plays a pivotal role in modulating cell proliferation, apop-
tosis, and angiogenesis,37 while concurrently suppressing 
immune cell activity.38 Moreover, the presence of FXYD6+ 
T cells provides an alternative perspective indicating that 
the immune evasion mechanism of glioma cells may not 
solely depend on the PD- 1/PD- L1 pathway. Bipositive 
TAMs and FXYD6 as therapeutic targets are mainly limited 
by the small number of cells and the intersection of their 
characteristic marker genes with normal cells. Given that 
FXYD6 is also expressed in some normal cells, such as 
stromal cells and oligodendrocytes, the direct target inhi-
bition of FXYD6 may influence the physiological function 
of normal cells and lead to certain side effects. Bipositive 
TAMs and M2- TAMs cells studied by Cao et al39 have similar 
effects, used the feature of accumulation at the margins 
of GBM and designed to outline the tumor margins and 
guide the surgery, thereby improving surgical prognosis. 
However, the production of both bipositive TAMs and 
FXYD6 was regulated by CMV infection. Therefore, we 
further explore therapeutic strategies that fundamentally 
address CMV+ GBM by directly targeting CMV.
Existing CMV- targeting approaches for GBM, 
including antiviral drug valganciclovir, 40 CAR- T 
therapy, 41 42  and dendritic cells (DCs) therapy, 43 have 
certain limitations such as inability to penetrate the 
blood- brain barrier, limited recognition of tumor 
intracellular antigens by CAR- T therapy, and the 
complexity of antigen presentation in DC cell therapy. 
At present, the research on CMV- targeting TCR- T cell 
therapy for GBM has not been noticed. In a phase 
I clinical trial (NCT04153279), pp65- specific TCR- T 
cell therapy for CMV infection after hematopoi-
etic stem- cell transplantation was conducted in only 
seven patients. 44 Previous CMV- specific T- cell ther -
apies using custom CMV peptide pools have shown 
suboptimal efficacy due to limited antitumor activity 
and persistence. 45 The exogenous TCR- transduced T 
cellular therapy demonstrates stronger specificity and 
sensitivity, and prolonged T- cell persistence for up to 
9 months. 46 Notably, there is no research investigating 
the use of exogenous CMV- specific TCR- transduced T 
cellular therapy for GBM. In this study, scTCR/BCR-  
seq was performed on CMV- infected and uninfected 
GBM tissue. Although specific BCR sequences were 
not acquired, the specific CMV- TCR sequences were 
obtained and successfully exogenously transduced 
to generate highly effective CMV- TCR- T cells. The 
major advantage of this strategy lies in its ability to 
obtain clonal TCR sequences that express tumor-  
recognizing antigens. Moreover, the natural selec-
tion of self TCR- T cells reduces the risk of off- target 
tumor toxicity of these TCR- T cells in patients. 47 48  
Remarkably, these therapeutic interventions demon-
strated ideal efficacy in a human- derived orthotopic 
glioblastoma mice model. These findings underscore 
that CMV- TCR- T therapy has a broad clinical applica-
tion prospect.
Although CMV- TCR- T has shown significant thera-
peutic effects, we did not find CMV antigen against 
CMV- TCR- T, which will also be the direction of 
our further research. In conclusion, our findings 
contribute to a better understanding of CMV infection 
in GBM immunosuppression, providing deep insights 
into the composition of the GBM immune micro-
environment. The identification of novel immune 
cell subpopulations and therapeutic targets opens 
avenues for improving GBM treatment strategies.
Author affiliations
1Hunan Cancer Hospital/the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of 
Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China
2The Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of the Chinese Ministry of Health, The 
Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of the Chinese Ministry of 
Education, Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 
China
3FuRong Laboratory, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China
4Department of Pathogeny Biology, School of Basic Medical Science, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, China
5Department of Neurosurgery in Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan, China
6Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Peking 
University, Beijing, China
7Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China Medical Research 
Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
8Department of Pathology in Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan, China
16
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access 
9Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Xinjiang Medical 
University, Urumqi, Xinjiang, China
Acknowledgements We would like to express our sincere gratitude to Professor 
Guojun Wu from the Department of Microbiology, Central South University, for 
providing the HCMV (strain AD169). The authors would like to extend their gratitude 
to the Singleron team for their continuous support. Special thanks are due to Dr 
Jianming Zeng from the University of Macau and all members of his bioinformatics 
team, biotrainee, for generously sharing their expertise and codes. Additionally, 
the authors acknowledge Hao Zhang from Nanjing Medical University for the 
development of the SCP package for scRNA- seq visualization (https://github.com/ 
zhanghao-njmu/SCP/).
Contributors XL performed the experiments and conducted the bioinformatics 
analysis of the sequence data. ZZ, YL, XW and MH collected tumor samples 
and clinical data. WG, KD, XL, XS, CH and YD managed the mouse models and 
performed pathological diagnosis of glioblastoma. MZ, SW, and YZ provide 
experimental and analytical assistance. QL, SC, and PD provided partial funding 
for the project. MW designed the experiments, interpreted the data, wrote the 
manuscript, and supervised the study. MW is responsible for the overall content as 
guarantor.
Funding The present study was financially supported by the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (No.82274371; No.82303362), the Scientific Research 
Program of FuRong Laboratory (No. 2023SK2085), the Hunan Cancer Hospital 
Climb Plan (No. YF2021005) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central 
Universities of Central South University (No. CX20230376).
Competing interests The authors declare no conflict of interest. The cartoon 
figure was created with www. figdraw. com.
Patient consent for publication Not applicable.
Ethics approval In this study, tumor tissue and blood samples were obtained from 
patients or volunteers. All the donors or their guardians provided written informed 
consent for sample collection and data analysis. All procedures of this study 
were approved by the Ethics Committee on Scientific Research of Central South 
University. (approval number 202103150). Participants gave informed consent to 
participate in the study before taking part.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data availability statement Data are available upon reasonable request.
Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer- reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and 
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content 
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability 
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error 
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY- NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non- commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non- commercial. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
ORCID iD
Xinmiao Long http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2898-0947
REFERENCES
 1 van den Bent MJ, Geurts M, French PJ, et al. Primary brain tumours 
in adults. Lancet 2023;402:1564–79. 
 2 Stupp R, Taillibert S, Kanner A, et al. Effect of tumor- treating fields 
plus maintenance Temozolomide vs maintenance Temozolomide 
alone on survival in patients with glioblastoma: a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA 2017;318:2306–16. 
 3 Sampson JH, Gunn MD, Fecci PE, et al. Brain immunology and 
immunotherapy in brain tumours. Nat Rev Cancer 2020;20:12–25. 
 4 Jackson CM, Choi J, Lim M. Mechanisms of immunotherapy 
resistance: lessons from glioblastoma. Nat Immunol 2019;20:1100–9. 
 5 Boldogh I, AbuBakar S, Albrecht T. Activation of proto- oncogenes: 
an immediate early event in human cytomegalovirus infection. 
Science 1990;247:561–4. 
 6 Richardson AK, Walker LC, Cox B, et al. Breast cancer and 
cytomegalovirus. Clin Transl Oncol 2020;22:585–602. 
 7 Samanta M, Harkins L, Klemm K, et al. High prevalence of human 
cytomegalovirus in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostatic 
carcinoma. J Urol 2003;170:998–1002. 
 8 Baryawno N, Rahbar A, Wolmer- Solberg N, et al. Detection of human 
cytomegalovirus in Medulloblastomas reveals a potential therapeutic 
target. J Clin Invest 2011;121:57147:4043–55:. 
 9 Herbein G. The human cytomegalovirus, from oncomodulation to 
oncogenesis. Viruses 2018;10:408. 
 10 Cobbs CS, Harkins L, Samanta M, et al. Human cytomegalovirus 
infection and expression in human malignant glioma. Cancer Res 
2002;62:3347–50.
 11 Hochhalter CB, Carr C, O’Neill BE, et al. The association between 
human cytomegalovirus and glioblastomas: a review. NN 2017;4:96. 
 12 Paulus C, Krauss S, Nevels M. A human cytomegalovirus antagonist 
of type I IFN- dependent signal transducer and activator of 
transcription signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:3840–5. 
 13 Yu G, Wang L- G, Han Y , et al. clusterProfiler: an R package for 
comparing biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS 
2012;16:284–7. 
 14 Jin S, Guerrero- Juarez CF , Zhang L, et al. Inference and analysis of 
cell- cell communication using Cellchat. Nat Commun 2021;12:1088. 
 15 Street K, Risso D, Fletcher RB, et al. Slingshot: cell lineage and 
pseudotime inference for single- cell transcriptomics. BMC Genomics 
2018;19:477. 
 16 Huang H, Wang C, Rubelt F , et al. Analyzing the mycobacterium 
tuberculosis immune response by T- cell receptor clustering with 
GLIPH2 and genome- wide antigen screening. Nat Biotechnol 
2020;38:1194–202. 
 17 Mei Y , Wang X, Zhang J, et al. Siglec- 9 acts as an immune- 
checkpoint molecule on macrophages in glioblastoma, restricting 
T- cell priming and immunotherapy response. Nat Cancer 
2023;4:1273–91. 
 18 Herradón G, Pérez- García C. Targeting midkine and pleiotrophin 
signalling pathways in addiction and neurodegenerative disorders: 
recent progress and perspectives. Br J Pharmacol 2014;171:837–48. 
 19 Shi Y , Ping Y- F , Zhou W, et al. Tumour- associated macrophages 
secrete pleiotrophin to promote PTPRZ1 signalling in glioblastoma 
stem cells for tumour growth. Nat Commun 2017;8:15080. 
 20 Carrasco E, Gómez de Las Heras MM, Gabandé-Rodríguez E, 
et al. The role of T cells in age- related diseases. Nat Rev Immunol 
2022;22:97–111. 
 21 Lim M, Xia Y , Bettegowda C, et al. Current state of immunotherapy 
for glioblastoma. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2018;15:422–42. 
 22 Cobbs CS, Soroceanu L, Denham S, et al. Modulation of oncogenic 
phenotype in human glioma cells by cytomegalovirus IE1- mediated 
mitogenicity. Cancer Res 2008;68:724–30. 
 23 Fornara O, Bartek J Jr, Rahbar A, et al. Cytomegalovirus infection 
induces a stem cell phenotype in human primary glioblastoma cells: 
prognostic significance and biological impact. Cell Death Differ 
2016;23:261–9. 
 24 Cao M- F , Chen L, Dang W- Q, et al. Hybrids by tumor- associated 
macrophages X glioblastoma cells entail nuclear reprogramming and 
glioblastoma invasion. Cancer Lett 2019;442:445–52. 
 25 Powell AE, Anderson EC, Davies PS, et al. Fusion between intestinal 
epithelial cells and macrophages in a cancer context results in 
nuclear reprogramming. Cancer Res 2011;71:1497–505. 
 26 Akhter MZ, Sharawat SK, Kumar V, et al. Aggressive serous epithelial 
ovarian cancer is potentially propagated by EpCAM(+)CD45(+) 
phenotype. Oncogene 2018;37:2089–103. 
 27 Wu M, Wu L, Wu W, et al. Phagocytosis of glioma cells enhances 
the immunosuppressive phenotype of bone marrow- derived 
macrophages. Cancer Res 2023;83:771–85. 
 28 Pallett LJ, Swadling L, Diniz M, et al. Tissue CD14(+)CD8(+) T cells 
reprogrammed by myeloid cells and modulated by LPS. Nature 
2023;614:334–42. 
 29 Vucur M, Ghallab A, Schneider AT, et al. Sublethal necroptosis 
signaling promotes inflammation and liver cancer. Immunity 
2023;56:1578–95. 
 30 Zhao J, Chen AX, Gartrell RD, et al. Immune and genomic correlates 
of response to anti- PD- 1 immunotherapy in glioblastoma. Nat Med 
2019;25:462–9. 
 31 Shen X, Zhao B. Efficacy of PD- 1 or PD- L1 inhibitors and PD- L1 
expression status in cancer: meta- analysis. BMJ 2018;362:k3529. 
 32 Abdelfattah N, Kumar P , Wang C, et al. Single- cell analysis of human 
glioma and immune cells identifies S100A4 as an immunotherapy 
target. Nat Commun 2022;13:767. 
17
Long X, et al. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e008967. doi:10.1136/jitc-2024-008967
Open access
 33 Gao Q, Chen X, Duan H, et al. FXYD6: a novel therapeutic target 
toward hepatocellular carcinoma. Protein Cell 2014;5:532–43. 
 34 Chaumette B, Ferrafiat V, Ambalavanan A, et al. Missense variants in 
ATP1A3 and FXYD gene family are associated with childhood- onset 
schizophrenia. Mol Psychiatry 2020;25:821–30. 
 35 Jiravejchakul N, Abe GL, Loza M, et al. Intercellular crosstalk in 
adult dental pulp is mediated by heparin- binding growth factors 
pleiotrophin and midkine. BMC Genomics 2023;24:184. 
 36 Lampropoulou E, Logoviti I, Koutsioumpa M, et al. Cyclin- dependent 
kinase 5 mediates pleiotrophin- induced endothelial cell migration. 
Sci Rep 2018;8:5893. 
 37 Cerezo- Wallis D, Contreras- Alcalde M, Troulé K, et al. Midkine 
rewires the melanoma microenvironment toward a tolerogenic and 
immune- resistant state. Nat Med 2020;26:1865–77. 
 38 Zhang Y , Zuo C, Liu L, et al. Single- cell RNA- sequencing atlas 
reveals an MDK- dependent immunosuppressive environment in ErbB 
pathway- mutated gallbladder cancer. J Hepatol 2021;75:1128–41. 
 39 Cao C, Yin H, Yang B, et al. Intra- operative definition of glioma 
infiltrative margins by visualizing immunosuppressive tumor- 
associated macrophages. Advanced Science 2023;10. 
 40 Stragliotto G, Pantalone MR, Rahbar A, et al. Valganciclovir as add- 
on to standard therapy in glioblastoma patients. Clin Cancer Res 
2020;26:4031–9. 
 41 Ahmed N, Brawley V, Hegde M, et al. HER2- specific chimeric antigen 
receptor- modified virus- specific T cells for progressive glioblastoma: 
a phase 1 dose- escalation trial. JAMA Oncol 2017;3:1094–101. 
 42 Choi BD, Yu X, Castano AP , et al. CAR- T cells secreting bites 
circumvent antigen escape without detectable toxicity. Nat 
Biotechnol 2019;37:1049–58. 
 43 Mitchell DA, Batich KA, Gunn MD, et al. Tetanus Toxoid and CCL3 
improve dendritic cell vaccines in mice and glioblastoma patients. 
Nature 2015;519:366–9. 
 44 Liu G, Chen H, Cao X, et al. Efficacy of pp65- specific TCR- T cell 
therapy in treating cytomegalovirus infection after hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation. Am J Hematol 2022;97:1453–63. 
 45 Smith C, Lineburg KE, Martins JP , et al. Autologous CMV- specific T 
cells are a safe adjuvant immunotherapy for primary glioblastoma 
multiforme. J Clin Invest 2020;130:6041–53. 
 46 Stadtmauer EA, Fraietta JA, Davis MM, et al. CRISPR- engineered T 
cells in patients with refractory cancer. Science 2020;367:eaba7365. 
 47 Louveau A, Smirnov I, Keyes TJ, et al. Structural and functional 
features of central nervous system lymphatic vessels. Nature 
2015;523:337–41. 
 48 He J, Xiong X, Yang H, et al. Defined tumor antigen- specific T 
cells potentiate personalized TCR- T cell therapy and prediction of 
immunotherapy response. Cell Res 2022;32:530–42. 