Original Article
A Distinct Transcriptional Program
in Human CAR T Cells Bearing the 4-1BB
Signaling Domain Revealed by scRNA-Seq
Angela C. Boroughs, 1,2,7 Rebecca C. Larson, 1,2 Nemanja D. Marjanovic, 3 Kirk Gosik,3 Ana P. Castano, 1
Caroline B.M. Porter, 3 Selena J. Lorrey, 1 Orr Ashenberg,3 Livnat Jerby,3 Matan Hofree,3 Gabriela Smith-Rosario,3
Robert Morris,4 Joshua Gould,3 Lauren S. Riley,1 Trisha R. Berger,1 Samantha J. Riesenfeld,3 Orit Rozenblatt-Rosen,3
Bryan D. Choi, 1 Aviv Regev,3,4,6 and Marcela V. Maus 1,2,3,5,6
1Cellular Immunotherapy Program and Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA; 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
3Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; 4Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer
Research, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02140, USA; 5Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA 02114, USA
T cells engineered to express chimeric antigen receptors
(CARs) targeting CD19 have produced impressive outcomes
for the treatment of B cell malignancies, but different products
vary in kinetics, persistence, and toxicity pro ﬁles based on the
co-stimulatory domains included in the CAR. In this study, we
performed transcriptional proﬁling of bulk CAR T cell popula-
tions and single cells to characterize the transcriptional states
of human T cells transduced with CD3 z, 4-1BB-CD3 z (BBz),
or CD28-CD3z (28z) co-stimulatory domains at rest and after
activation by triggering their CAR or their endogenous T cell
receptor (TCR). We identiﬁed a transcriptional signature com-
mon across CARs with the CD3 z signaling domain, as well as a
distinct program associated with the 4-1BB co-stimulatory
domain at rest and after activation. CAR T cells bearing BB z
had increased expression of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
class II genes, ENPP2, and interleukin (IL)-21 axis genes, and
decreased PD1 compared to 28 z CAR T cells. Similar to previ-
ous studies, we also found BBz CAR CD8 T cells to be enriched
in a central memory cell phenotype and fatty acid metabolism
genes. Our data uncovered transcriptional signatures related to
costimulatory domains and demonstrated that signaling do-
mains included in CARs uniquely shape the transcriptional
programs of T cells.
INTRODUCTION
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells targeting CD19 are an effec-
tive treatment option for relapsed or refractory B cell malignancies,1–5
including B cell leukemias 6,7 and large-cell lymphomas.8,9 The incor-
poration of co-stimulatory domains is thought to be critical to the
clinical ef ﬁcacy of CAR T cells, since co-stimulation enhances cyto-
kine production, proliferation, and persistence of the modi ﬁed
T cells.
10 The two main co-stimulatory domains contained in US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved CAR T cells in clin-
ical use are CD28, a member of the B7 family, and 4-1BB, a member of
the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily.
In CARs directed to CD19, the clinical response rates of adults with
relapsed or refractory large B cell lymphoma to CARs with the
CD28 co-stimulation domain (axicabtagene ciloleucel) and the
4-1BB domain (tisagenlecleucel) are very similar.
8,11 Likewise,
in vitro co-culture experiments using 4-1BB- and CD28-containing
CARs against the same antigen have strikingly similar cytotoxicity ef-
fects. However, clinical studies have found profound differences in
the kinetics and phenotypes of these two CAR T cell products.
CD28-based CARs undergo a more rapid expansion but have less
persistence than do 4-1BB-based CARs, which can persist for more
than 8 years.
12,13 CD28-CD3z CAR T cells also have enhanced glyco-
lytic metabolism in vitro and induce an effector memory phenotype,
whereas 4-1BB-CD3 z CAR T cells rely more heavily on fatty acid
metabolism and typically have a central memory phenotype. 14
The underlying molecular basis of these differences is not well under-
stood. Given the complexity of a CAR T cell population, it is likely
that the overall effects of the expression and activation of each CAR
signaling domain (co-stimulatory domain and CD3 z) are integrated
into the overall function of each modi ﬁed T cell, and those in turn
Received 28 April 2020; accepted 21 July 2020;
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2020.07.023.
6These authors contributed equally to this work.
7Present address: ArsenalBio, South San Francisco, CA, USA
Correspondence: Marcela V. Maus, Cellular Immunotherapy Program and Cancer
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,149 13th Street, Room 3.216, Charlestown,
MA 02129, USA.
E-mail: mvmaus@mgh.harvard.edu
Correspondence: Aviv Regev, Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, 415 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
E-mail: aregev@broadinstitute.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020 ª 2020 The American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy. 2577
(legend on next page)
Molecular Therapy
2578 Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020
integrate to a population-level response. Although multiple studies
have assessed key markers and cytokines by ﬂow cytometry and func-
tional assays, 12,14–17 interpretations are complicated by selection of
markers that re ﬂect prior assumptions and the heterogeneity of the
starting and analyzed T cell populations, which are composed of mul-
tiple phenotypes. Conversely, there is a paucity of deep, unbiased,
transcriptional proﬁling studies in CAR T cells, at either the popula-
tion or single-cell level.
In this study, we combined population (bulk) RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq) and single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) of ﬁrst- and sec-
ond-generation human CAR T cells, which were designed to be iden-
tical in all aspects except their signaling domains. Through RNA-seq,
we pro ﬁled 240 samples, spanning all combinations of CAR con-
structs, expressed in either CD4 or CD8 human T cells from three
healthy donors. We further used scRNA-seq to uncover heterogeneity
within each CAR T cell product from two additional donors. Based on
gene expression co-variation patterns within each population at a
given time point, we inferred regulatory programs active in subsets
of CAR T cells. We identi ﬁed transcriptional signatures common
across CAR constructs, compared CAR activation to the T cell recep-
tor (TCR) in CAR T cells, and identi ﬁed a program unique to 4-1BB-
bearing CARs that is present at rest and after antigen stimulation
through the CAR. Notably, we found that the central memory pheno-
type, as de ﬁned by expression of CCR7, is driven by the 4-1BB
program and is likely to be a key driver of the prolonged persistence
of 4-1BB-based CAR T cells.
RESULTS
CAR Designs, Transduction, and Preparation of CAR T Cells for
Transcriptional Proﬁling
To identify transcriptional differences downstream of various CARs,
we synthesized four CD19 CAR constructs bearing distinct signaling
domains. These constructs closely resemble those in clinical use but
with slight deviations to enable direct comparison of intracellular
signaling domains ( Figure 1A). The CARs consisted of a ﬁrst-gener-
ation CAR with only a CD3 z signaling domain ( z), a second-genera-
tion CAR with a CD28 costimulatory domain (28 z; using a different
vector, promoter, and transmembrane domain than axicabtagene cil-
oleucel), a second-generation CAR with a 4-1BB co-stimulatory
domain (BB z; same as tisagenlecleucel), and a control CAR with a
truncated, non-signaling CD3 z chain ( Dz). All CARs had the same
single-chain variable fragment (scFv) antigen binding domain against
CD19 with identical CD8 hinge and transmembrane domains and
were expressed behind an EF1 a promoter using a third-generation
self-inactivating lentiviral vector. To facilitate evaluation of CAR
transduction, we included mCherry as a ﬂuorescent reporter gene
following a 2A ribosomal skip element. To cross-validate our ﬁndings
on the signaling domains independently from the scFv, we also syn-
thesized CARs with an anti-EGFR scFv domain (based on cetuximab)
and kept all other components the same ( Figure S1).
To generate CAR T cells, we isolated CD4
+ and CD8+ primary T cells
from the peripheral blood of healthy donors and mixed these two
populations in equal proportions prior to activation with anti-CD3/
CD28 beads ( Figure 1 B). The following day, we transduced bulk
T cells with lentiviral vectors to express one of the four CAR con-
structs ( z,2 8 z,B B z, and Dz) or left them untransduced (UT). We
expanded CAR T cells for 1 week, then removed beads and continued
culture for another week, approximating a resting cell state prior to
experimental analysis. All T cell cultures had comparable transduc-
tion and transgene expression as determined by the mCherry surro-
gate marker ( Figures S2 A and S2B). Furthermore, CAR T cells had
equivalent cytotoxicity against Nalm6 ( Figure S2C).
Because T cells are composed of a heterogeneous population of cells,
we hypothesized that co-stimulation domains would have a differen-
tial effect on CD4 and CD8 T cell sub-populations. Therefore, we
generated a high-quality, bulk RNA-seq atlas of CD19-targeting
CAR T cell pro ﬁles from three normal donors by simulating their
CAR T cells for 4 or 24 h through their CAR (using irradiated
Nalm6 leukemia cells, which express CD19 endogenously) or through
their TCR (using beads), and then sorting mCherry
+CD4+ and
mCherry+CD8+ T cell populations for each construct analyzed
Figure 1. Antigen Stimulation of CAR T Cells through Their CAR Yields a Weaker but Similar T Cell Activation Signal Compared to Stimulation via Anti-CD 3-
TCR
(A) Vector maps of CD19 CAR constructs (L, leader sequence; TM, hinge and transmembrane domain). (B) Experimental design of bulk RNA sequencing (RNA- seq). T cells
were isolated from a leukopak from three normal donors, sorted on CD3
+ and CD8 + or CD4 +, mixed at a 1:1 CD4-to-CD8 ratio, activated with anti-CD3/CD28 T cell
expansion beads, and transduced with one of the four CAR constructs or left untransduced (UT). Cells were expanded for 7 days before the beads were remo ved. T cells
were then rested for an additional 7 days prior to stimulation with anti-CD3/CD28 beads or irradiated Nalm6 cells at a 1:1 effector-to-target cell rat io for 0, 4 or 24 h (see
Figures S2A and S2B for transduction efﬁciencies). Samples were then sorted on mCherry + CD4+ or CD8+ T cells and sequenced separately as bulk populations. Data were
collected for T cells from three human donors with technical duplicates. (C) Experimental design of single-cell RNA-seq. T cells from two additional normal donors were
isolated, activated, and transduced and expanded as in (B). UT T cells, BB z,2 8z, and z CAR T cells were either left unstimulated or stimulated with irradiated Nalm6 cells at a
1:1 effector-to-target cell ratio for 24 h. In addition, the UT T cells were stimulated through the TCR with irradiated K562 cells expressing an scFv against CD3 at a 1:1 effector-
to-target cell ratio. Stimulated and unstimulated samples were then sorted as live mCherry + cells and then sequenced using 10x Technology. More than 3,500 cells were
sequenced per sample from two human donors. (D–F) Principal component analysis of the expression proﬁles from the bulk RNA-seq samples corrected for donor variation.
Colored from left to right by (D) stimulation condition, (E) CD4+ versus CD8+, and (F) CAR construct. (G) t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (tSNE) of 83,123 single-
cell expression proﬁles (dots) of all single cells sequenced from two donors after donor-speciﬁc batch correction (see Figures S2B and S2C). Cells are labeled by their CAR
(color hue) and the type of stimulation (light tones for unstimulated). (H) tSNE expression proﬁles as in (G), colored by the degree of CD8A and CD4 expression. (I) Violin plots
showing the distribution of T cell activation signature scores across each condition in CD4 + or CD8+ T cells. T cell activation gene signature were deﬁned as the 15 most
upregulated genes shared between CAR-activated CAR T cells and anti-CD3-activated UT cells compared to resting T cells (*p < 2.2/C210/C016, Wilcoxon test; gene signatures
are shown in Tables S1–S3).
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020 2579
(Figure 1B). Using two additional normal donors, we also generated a
scRNA-seq atlas of 83,123 pro ﬁles from z,2 8z, and BB z CAR T cells
at rest and at 24 h post-stimulation through their CAR ( Figure 1C).
UT T cells at rest or post-stimulation through their TCR were used
as controls. We used K562 cells expressing a surface scFv against hu-
man CD3 (K562-aCD3) to stimulate the TCR, avoiding the agonistic
anti-CD28 antibody coated on beads. Quality was consistent across
samples from the same donor, but differed by donor and stimulation
type, as expected (Figure S2D). We aligned the datasets and corrected
for donor-speciﬁc batch effects with canonical correlation analysis
18
(Figure S2E).
Stimulation of CAR T Cells through Their CAR Yields a Weaker
but Similar T Cell Activation Signal Compared to Stimulation via
Their TCR
To investigate the main drivers of variation across different CAR
T cell populations, we ﬁrst performed principal-component analysis
(PCA) of the bulk RNA-seq pro ﬁles, combined with linear modeling
to account for donor variation. We observed a difference in transcrip-
tional response following T cell activation according to the time and
type of stimulation the T cell received ( Figures 1 D and S2F). TCR-
activated CAR T cells grouped with TCR-activated UT cells and
further away from the unstimulated cells on PC1 compared to
CAR-activated CAR T cells. This is consistent with ﬁndings from
mouse CAR T cells, where stimulation through the CAR versus
TCR induces distinct gene expression signatures.
19 The distinction
between CAR T cells stimulated for 4 and 24 h through their CAR
was less clear when looking at the CAR-activated groups, but when
PCA was performed for each donor, there was a clear separation be-
tween the 4 and 24 h CAR-activated groups ( Figure S2F). While sam-
ples primarily grouped according to the type of stimulation, samples
within the stimulation groups separated secondarily by CD4
+ versus
CD8+ cell types ( Figure 1 E) but not by the type of CAR construct
expressed ( Figure 1 F). The only exception was for Dz CAR T cells
stimulated with CD19-expressing targets, which grouped with unsti-
mulated cells. This indicated that lentiviral transduction with Dz
CARs has little to no discernible effect on the T cell transcriptome
and, therefore, serves as an appropriate negative control for CAR-
mediated signaling.
To determine whether these distinctions stemmed from differences in
the percentage of cells being stimulated as opposed to the degree or
kind of stimulation within each cell, we turned to the scRNA-seq pro-
ﬁles. Overall, the bulk differences with T cell stimulation were also re-
ﬂected in the single-cell pro ﬁles, suggesting an overall shift across the
entire population rather than a change in the proportion of respond-
ing cells (Figure 1G). Furthermore, unstimulated UT and CAR T cells
grouped together, indicating that the separation with activation is a
result of the stimulation type rather than the CAR transduction.
Similar to the bulk sequencing, T cells in the scRNA-seq analysis
also separated by CD4
+ and CD8 + cell types within the stimulation
groups ( Figure 1 H). When pseudobulk CD4 + and CD8 + proﬁles
were generated by averaging the respective scRNA-seq data and
included with the true bulk RNA-seq samples in the PCA with correc-
tion for donor variation, the cells again separated on PC1 according to
the type of receptor stimulated (CAR versus TCR; Figure S2F). Thus,
TCR stimulation is distinct from CAR stimulation, and this held true
whether the TCR was engaged by K562- aCD3 cells or aCD3/CD28
beads.
Next, we compared the genes expressed in TCR- and CAR-stimulated
T cells versus unstimulated T cells. Comparing the top genes ex-
pressed across cells with the three stimuli, the genes speci ﬁct o
TCR-stimulated cells were known T cell activation genes (e.g.,
IFNG, IL3, and CCL4; Table S1 ). Genes speci ﬁc to resting CAR and
UT T cells were known resting T cell genes (e.g., IL7R and KLF2).
However, CAR-stimulated CAR T cell genes were less clearly associ-
ated with T cell activation (with the exception of IL2RA). Neverthe-
less, 75% of the top 20 genes upregulated in CAR-activated CAR
T cells were among the top 20 genes induced in TCR-stimulated cells
(Table S2). We used the 75% of these genes that overlapped to deﬁne a
T cell activation signature (Table S3). TCR-stimulated cells expressed
the activation signature at an increased level compared to CAR-acti-
vated CAR T cells (Figure 1I; p value <10
/C016, Wilcoxon test), suggest-
ing that CAR-activated CAR T cells have a weaker but similar
response to activation as TCR-stimulated cells.
Resting CAR T Cells Have a Tonic CD3 z Signaling Signature
Any receptor expressed on the surface of a cell has the potential to
induce low levels of signaling that may lead to detectable transcrip-
tional changes in the absence of triggers, particularly CARs that are
constitutively driven by strong promoters. This ligand-independent
signaling, otherwise known as “tonic signaling, ” can be evident in
the CAR T cells at rest, or before antigen stimulation through their
CAR. We examined the difference among the resting CAR T cells
to look for evidence of tonic transcriptional activity from the various
CARs. Based on bulk sequencing pro ﬁles, we identiﬁed a set of genes
that was signi ﬁcantly induced in all three T cell subsets with func-
tional CARs compared to Dz (Wald test, Benjamini-Hochberg false
discovery rate [FDR] <0.1), whereas no genes were signi ﬁcantly
differentially expressed between Dz CAR and UT T cells. This gene
set was identi ﬁed by ﬁrst compiling three lists of differentially ex-
pressed genes between z and Dz,2 8 z and Dz, and BB z and Dz in
CD8 T cell samples. We then calculated the overlap of genes that ex-
isted in all three gene sets as the tonic CD3 z signaling signature (Fig-
ure 2A). Many of the genes in this set followed the same expression
trends in the CD4 T cell samples (although in some cases the genes
did not have an FDR <0.1 in all three comparisons).
Therefore, CARs bearing a functional CD3 z chain had a speci ﬁc,
stimulation-independent, transcriptional signature at rest. This signa-
ture was enriched in genes involved in the response to cytokine stim-
uli (gene set enrichment analysis [GSEA]; FDR = 1.51 /C210
/C06),
including CCL3 and CCL4, which are involved in monocyte recruit-
ment, and GZMB (encoding granzyme B), a key cytotoxicity gene.
Although tonic signaling of CARs has been reported before, it has
mainly been attributed to differences in the binding characteristics
of the extracellular portions of the CARs rather than signaling
Molecular Therapy
2580 Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020
Figure 2. Transcriptional Signatures of Resting CAR T Cells Indicate Tonic Signaling through Both CD3 z and the Co-stimulatory Domain
(A) Heatmap of normalized expression from bulk RNA-seq of both the upregulated and downregulated genes that were differentially expressed (DE). FDR < 0.1 in all three
functional CD19 CARs: 28 z,B Bz, and z at rest in each case compared to Dz at rest in either CD8 or CD4 T cells. Each column represents a different donor, and columns of
heatmaps are always ordered as donors 1 to 3. (B) tSNE of scRNA-seq from all CAR T cells at rest, colored by the cluster assigned using a graph-based clust ering approach.
Assigned clusters were then deﬁned based on the gene expression of several key genes (see also Figures S3H and S3I). (C) The same tSNE plot as in (B), depicting degree of
(legend continued on next page)
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020 2581
independently through the costimulatory domains.20,21 To determine
whether this signature was dependent on CD3 z expression rather
than the scFv of the CAR, we validated this signature in EGFR-speciﬁc
CAR T cells. Using digital droplet PCR of selected upregulated and
downregulated signature genes, we found that EGFR-speci ﬁc CAR
T cells had a similar stimulation-independent transcriptional signa-
ture as the CD19-targeting cells ( Figure S3A–S3G). Thus, the expres-
sion of a CAR in T cells modulates their transcriptional expression
proﬁles even at rest, prior to CAR-antigen engagement, and this pro-
ﬁle is independent of the antigen to which the CAR is speci ﬁc. It also
demonstrated that the 4-1BB-speci ﬁc effects are present across
different antigen/CAR combinations.
Evidence of Tonic Signaling through the 4-1BB Co-stimulation
Domain
An additional contributing factor to understanding the effect of co-
stimulation on CAR T cells is that there are multiple sub-populations
of T cells present at homeostasis, including CD4 + and CD8 + T cells
and their respective naive, effector, and memory subsets. 22,23 The ef-
fects of co-stimulation could be different in the different populations
or shift the make-up of these populations. To explore this factor, we
leveraged the single-cell pro ﬁles to estimate the heterogeneity of UT
and CAR T cells prior to antigen stimulation through their CAR.
Since CAR T cells were resting, we could identify T cell sub-popula-
tions based on known surface markers, whereas once the T cells are
activated, these markers are no longer able to differentiate sub-popu-
lations of T cells.
24 Using a graph-based clustering approach, we clus-
tered the resting T cells into nine groups ( Figure 2B), annotated them
by the expression of known T cell sub-population marker genes (CD4,
CD8A, CCR7, and SELL [CD62L]; Figures 2 C and 2D), and scored
them for cell cycle gene signatures to rule out changes due to cell di-
vision (Figures 2E, S3H, and S3I). Among CD8 cells, we distinguished
effector memory-like (cluster 2, CD8A
+, CCR7/C0, SELL/C0) and central
memory-like (cluster 3, CD8A+, CCR7+, SELL+) T cells. Within CD4
cells, we distinguished central memory-like (cluster 1, CD4+, CCR7+,
SELL+), effector memory-like (cluster 0, CD4+, CCR7/C0, SELL/C0), and
an intermediate population, which expressed CD62L but not CCR7
(cluster 7, CD4
+, CCR7/C0, SELL+). When evaluating where the
different CARs fell within the T cell sub-population clusters, only
BBz CAR T cells had a distribution across the clusters that was
distinct from all other cells (p value < 2.2 /C210
/C016, c2 test). Although
cluster 4 was highly enriched in BB z CAR T cells, cells in this cluster
were actively dividing, with a high S phase gene score, making it hard
to interpret their phenotype beyond dividing cells. Additionally, this
cluster was only found in donor 4, whereas all other clusters con-
tained cells from both donors. Therefore, this cell cluster was not
further analyzed. In non-dividing cell clusters, the BB z CAR T cells
were enriched in CD8 central memory-like cells (cluster 3) and
depleted among CD8 effector memory-like cells (cluster 2) and
CD4 central memory-like cells (cluster 1; Figures 2 F and 2G; Table
S4). Previous studies showed that BB z CAR T cells are enriched for
CD8 central memory over effector memory after CAR stimulation.
14
In this study, we found this enrichment present prior to stimulation.
Thus, the 4-1BB co-stimulation domain may also have tonic signaling
effects that are distinct from CD3 z tonic signaling.
To further support the hypothesis of constitutive signaling from the 4-
1BB co-stimulatory domain, we analyzed differentially expressed genes
between BBz and 28 z bulk RNA-seq pro ﬁl e si nr e s t i n gC A RTc e l l s
(Figure S4A). Recently, in vitro studies have demonstrated that several
days after CAR activation, 28 z CAR T cells have enhanced glycolytic
metabolism, whereas BBz CAR T cells rely more on fatty acid meta-
bolism.
14 We also found that fatty acid oxidation genes were enriched
in BBz versus 28z CAR T cells at rest (Figure S5). This further illustrates
that signaling from the co-stimulatory domain, particularly 4-1BB, can
modulate T cell programs independent of antigen stimulation.
Antigen Stimulation in BB z CAR T Cells Results in Persistent
Upregulation of an Activation Program Associated with
Expression of MHC Class II Genes, but Not PD1
Given our ﬁnding of constitutive transcriptional changes occurring
in CAR T cells, we next asked what transcriptional changes occur
following antigen stimulation of CAR T cells and if transcriptional
differences remain between the co-stimulatory domains ( Figures 3A
and S4A; Table S5 ). In the bulk RNA-seq, we found that many of
the genes differentially expressed in BB z versus 28 z CAR T cells
at rest were also differentially expressed following activation but
were more pronounced. For example, activated BB z CAR T cells
were still enriched for fatty acid oxidation ( Figures 3 A and S5).
Likewise, major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC class
II) genes were upregulated in BB z CAR T cells prior to stimulation,
and this difference increased with activation. MHC class II genes
and their regulators were among the most differentially expressed
genes with activation when comparing BB z to 28z CAR T cells ( Fig-
ure 3 B). We validated this ﬁnding at the protein level by ﬂow cy-
tometry of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR expression in
anti-CD19 CAR T cells at rest and after activation. HLA-DR was
uniquely upregulated in BB z CAR T cells compared to all other
CAR T cells at rest and after activation ( Figures 3 C and 3D). This
was not only true for the CD19-directed CAR T cells, but also for
anti-EGFR T cells following activation ( Figure 3 E), suggesting that
this differential expression in BB z CAR T cells was independent
of the antigen-binding domain of the CAR.
To determine whether these genes were speciﬁc to the expression of 4-
1BB, rather than the lack of CD28 in BB z CAR T cells, we further
compared the differentially expressed genes between BB z and z
CAR T cells. We found that many of the same genes upregulated in
CD8A and CD4 expression. (D) Violin plots of cells showing the degree of expression of SELL (CD62L) and CCR7 used to describe the clusters shown in (B). (E) Violin plots of
cells as clustered in (B), showing degree of S phase and G 2M phase signatures. (F) Of all the cells in a deﬁned cluster, the percent contribution of each CAR to these cells is
shown. (G) Graphical display showing the correlation matrix of the chi-square test residual values (difference between observed and expected value s; see also Table S4).
Molecular Therapy
2582 Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020
the BBz versus 28z analysis were also upregulated in this analysis, sug-
gesting that the presence of 4-1BB was inducing the genes ’ expression
(Figure S6). Additionally, this analysis revealed that immunosuppres-
sive genes (interleukin [IL]-10) and pro-apoptotic genes (BCL2L11)
were upregulated in the ﬁrst-generation CAR ( z) compared to BB z,
which highlights the role of costimulation in inhibiting apoptotic
pathways.25
We also used these gene expression pro ﬁles to analyze the signaling
pathways that were differentially regulated between activated BB z
Figure 3. CAR T Cells with the 4-1BB Co-stimulation Domain Have Persistent Upregulation of Markers Associated with Activation, Particularly MHC Cla ss II
Genes but Not PD1
(A) Volcano plots of DE genes between BB z (positive x axis) and 28 z CARs at 24 h post-CAR activation in CD4
+ (left) and CD8 + (right) T cells. Genes with FDR <0.05 are
colored red (see also Figure S4 for 0- and 4-h time points; see Table S5 for gene list). (B) Heatmap showing normalized HLA class II gene expression in CD4 + T cells from all
three donors of 28z and BBz CAR T cells 24 h post-CAR stimulation. (C–E) Mean ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) of HLA-DR surface expression measured by ﬂow cytometry on
CD19-CAR T cells (C) at rest or (D) 24 h after activation of CD19-speciﬁc CARs with Nalm6 cells at a 1:1 ratio, or (E) U87-mediated activation of EGFR-speciﬁc CAR T cells at a
2:1 effector-to-target cell ratio. (F) IL21R expression in bulk RNA-seq BB z and 28z CAR T samples with CAR stimulation. Individual TPM values shown with mean and SEM;
adj-p values were calculated by DESeq2 using a Holm-Bonferroni correction. (G) IL-21 cytokine levels measured in the supernatants of bulk CD4 +/CD8+ CD19-CAR T cells
stimulated for 24 h with Nalm6 cells at a 1:1 ratio or (H) EGFR-CAR T cells stimulated with U87 cells at a 2:1 effector-to-target cell ratio. (I) MFI of PD1expression in CD19-CAR
T cells with CAR stimulation (via Nalm6 cells, 1:1 effector-to-target cell ratio). (C–I) N = 3 normal donors that were not used for RNA-seq studies; mean and SEM plotted. (C–F)
When required, p values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using a Holm-Bonferroni method adjustment (*adj-p < 0.05, **adj-p < 0.01) or (G–I) p va lues were
determined using a paired Student’s t test between BB z and 28z (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). See also Table S6.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020 2583
and 28z CAR T cells that were not present in our tonic signaling anal-
ysis. We hypothesize that genes identi ﬁed in this analysis would
represent 4-1BB-speci ﬁc genes that require a threshold of activation
in order to be produced (i.e., baseline activation through tonic expres-
sion is not enough for them to be induced). In CAR-activated cells,
there was upregulation of multiple cytokine and immune signaling
pathways in BB z CAR T cells compared to 28 z CAR T cells ( Fig-
ure S4 B). The pathway containing the most differentially expressed
genes was the “response to cytokine. ” Among the speci ﬁc cytokine
pathways that appeared in the analysis were TNF- a and interferon
(IFN)-g signaling pathways. Genes in these pathways were upregu-
lated after stimulation in BB z CARs versus 28 z (Table S6).
Another set of cytokine genes that were differentially expressed in
activated BBz and 28z CAR T cells were part of the IL-21 axis. This
axis is particularly important for the formation of long-term memory
CD8 T cell responses,
26,27 so we examined differences in genes
involved with this axis between CAR T cells. The cytokines and cyto-
kine receptors IL21, IL21R, IL12RB2, and IL23R were upregulated in
BBz CARs versus 28z CARs, in both CD4
+ and CD8+ T cells, by bulk
RNA-seq (Figures 3F, S7A, and S7B). We con ﬁrmed these transcrip-
tional ﬁndings at the protein level by measuring the amount of IL-21
produced following antigen stimulation. BBz CAR T cells indeed pro-
duced more soluble IL-21 than 28 z and z CARs in both anti-CD19
CARs (Figure 3G) and in anti-EGFR CAR T cells ( Figure 3H).
Finally, we looked for the genes that were the most differentially ex-
pressed between BB z and 28 z CAR T cells across all time points.
ENPP2 (encoding autotaxin) was the most signi ﬁcant upregulated
gene between the two types of CAR T cells, induced in all BB z sam-
ples at rest and following stimulation ( Figure S7 C). ENPP2 encodes
a phosphodiesterase, which hydrolyzes lysophospholipids to pro-
duce lysophosphatidic acid and is involved in chemotaxis and pro-
liferation of various cell types.
28 Conversely, LGMN (encoding as-
paraginyl endopeptidase) and PDCD1 (encoding the PD1) were
the most strongly suppressed genes in stimulated BB z versus 28 z
CD4+ CAR T cells ( Figure 3 A). Although there were no genes sup-
pressed in BB z CD8+ CAR T cells that had an adjusted-p (adj-p)
value <0.1 at 24 h, PDCD1 had one of the higher expression differ-
ences between 28 z and BB z CAR T cells ( Figure S7 D). PD1 is both
an inhibitory receptor and a known marker of T cell activation that
also suppresses CAR T cell function. We validated this ﬁnding using
ﬂow cytometry, con ﬁrming that surface expression of PD1 was
lower in stimulated BB z CAR T cells compared to 28 z CAR
T cells manufactured from multiple healthy human donors ( Fig-
ure 3I). These data suggest that 4-1BB signaling prevents the induc-
tion of PD1 since PDCD1 was up on both z and 28 z compared to
BBz (Figures 3 A, 3I, and S6).
Antigen Stimulation of CARs Bearing the 4-1BB versus CD28 Co-
stimulation Domains Induces a Th1 versus Th2 Polarization
Program in CD4 T Cells
CD4 T cells can polarize to T helper (Th)1 or Th2, which causes them
to produce different cytokines in response to stimulation. To deter-
mine whether CAR co-stimulatory domains differentially polarize
CD4 T cells, we analyzed expression of Th1 and Th2 polarizing genes
in CD4
+ BBz or 28z CAR T cells. We found that Th1 polarizing genes
were enhanced in CD4 + BBz CAR T cells after CAR stimulation and
at rest (Figures 4A), whereas activated 28z cells were enriched for Th2
early polarizing genes 29 (differentially expressed genes up in 28 z;
FDR < 0.1, GSEA: p value = 9.12e /C09, FDR = 4.44e /C05; Figure S7 E).
In particular, IL12RB2, which encodes a subunit of the IL-12 receptor
and is upregulated in Th1 polarized cells, 5,30 was upregulated in both
28z and BB z cells at 4 h post-stimulation, but only BB z cells main-
tained this higher expression at 24 h ( Figure S7 B). Other genes
induced in CD4 + BBz CAR T cells included the Th1 transcription
factor (TF) genes EGR1 and TBX21 and the Th17 TF gene RORC (Fig-
ure 4B). When conﬁrming these results at the protein level, CAR-acti-
vated 28 z CAR T cells (both CD19-CAR and EGFR-CAR) consis-
tently secreted higher levels of the Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-5
compared to BB z CAR T cells ( Figures 4 C, 4D, and S7F). Thus, the
type of CAR co-stimulatory domain plays a strong role in the cytokine
Figure 4. Antigen Stimulation of CARs Bearing the 4-1BB Co-stimulation Domain Results in Marked Th1 Polarization
(A) Gene set enrichment analysis of an early polarizing Th1 signature. Position of signature genes depicted in a rank fold-change list of the DE genes b etween RNA-seq BBz
and 28z proﬁles 24 h post-CAR activation with Nalm6 cells (see also Figure S7E). (B) Heatmap of known Th1 cell polarizing genes in CD4 + T cells from three donors in 28 z
versus BB z CARs 24 h post-Nalm6 stimulation (see also Figure S7 B). (C) IL-4 soluble cytokine detected in the supernatants of CD19-CAR T cells after 24 h of Nalm6
stimulation at a 1:1 ratio and in (D) EGFR-CAR T cells stimulated for 24 h with U87 cells at a 2:1 effector-to-target ratio measured by Luminex (see Figure S7F for IL-5). (C and
D) N = 3 normal donors that were not used for RNA-seq studies. Mean and SEM plotted. p values were determined using a paired Student’s t test between BBz and 28z.* p<
0.05.
Molecular Therapy
2584 Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020
Figure 5. Antigen-Speciﬁc Activation of 4-1BB CAR T Cells Induces a Distanced Program with Additional Genes Networks Than 4-1BB Ligand-Mediated
Triggering of 4-1BB
Single-cell expression proﬁles of CAR T cells after 24 h of stimulation with Nalm6 cells were normalized and aligned across two donors. (A) tSNE plot of single-cell expression
proﬁles (dots) colored by CAR T cell construct. (B) Results of latent Dirichlet allocation on T cells with 16 topics and a tolerance parameter of 0.1 (se e Materials and Methods).
For each topic shown, there is a bar plot of top-scoring genes (y axis), ranked by a uniqueness score. The genes in topic 11, which were also found as DE and upregulated
(adj-p < 0.05) in BB z versus 28z CAR T cells at any time point from bulk RNA-seq data, are in red. Each cell (dot) of the tSNE is colored by the weight of the topic (see also
(legend continued on next page)
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020 2585
polarization pro ﬁle of CAR T cells, particularly after stimulation of
the CAR.
Stimulation Activates a Range of Cellular Programs in Different
CAR T Cells
To examine the spectrum of activated CAR T cell populations that
underlie the global distinctions between BB z and 28 z CAR T cells
that we observed via bulk sequencing, we turned to the scRNA-seq
proﬁles. In this study, we observed separation of BB z CAR T cells
from the other activated CAR T cells, whereas pro ﬁles of 28 z- and
z-containing CAR T cells were similarly distributed ( Figure 5 A).
We identi ﬁed gene programs underlying these cellular distributions
with a latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA), or “topic modeling, ”
approach. This unsupervised approach was recently used to analyze
proﬁles of single immune cells,
31 capturing the continuous nature
of their variation and showing that different T cell subsets can activate
similar programs. For instance, a CD4 T cell can have an effector
memory program, a Th1 program, and a Th17 program during a
particular antigen response.
32 We followed the program analysis
with a network analysis 33 to associate certain programs with putative
TF regulators with the aim of identifying mechanisms driving differ-
ences in CAR T cell behavior in all three activated CAR T cell proﬁles.
The programs we identi ﬁed (referred to as “topics”)r e ﬂected the
main facets of known T cell biology and varied among the different
stimulated CAR T cells ( Figures 5B and S8). A CD8 memory-speci ﬁc
program (topic 9) was clearly expressed in the CD8A-expressing cells
(Figure 5C) and was highly enriched in 4-1BB CAR T cells (Figures S9
and S10). Genes encoding granzyme B and CD27 were two of the
most signi ﬁcant contributors to this pathway. This was similar to
what we observed in the bulk sequencing, where BB z CAR T cells
were enriched in the CD8 central memory phenotype ( Figures 2 F
and 2G). A Th2 program (topic 8) scored highly in a small subset
of z CAR T cells, and to a lesser extent 28 z and BBz CAR T cells, sug-
gesting only a small subset of cells accounts for the Th2 response
observed in 28 z CAR T cells during bulk sequencing (p value
<10
/C016 and 3.5 /C210/C05 respectively, Kolmogorov-Smirnov [KS]
test). When identifying TF regulators by network analysis, the Th2
program was associated with ETS1, a known regulator of Th2 cyto-
kines
34 (Figure 5D). A polyfunctional program of multiple cytokines
and chemokines, including IFN- g, IL-3, and IL-9 (topic 14), was ex-
pressed in cells with high activation signatures (from Figure 1I) and
was enriched in z and 28 z cells ( Figures 5 E, S9, and S10; Table S3 ;
p value <10/C016 and 1.21 /C210/C010 respectively, KS test). This polyfunc-
tional program was associated with nuclear factor kB (NF- kB) and
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) TFs (Figure 5D). A cell pro-
liferation program (topic 12) was associated with many known regu-
lators of proliferation ( Table S8 ) and contained cells from all three
CAR T cell types. Cells scoring high for proliferation scored low for
topics that included cytokine production, suggesting that prolifera-
tion and cytokine production are mutually exclusive. Topic 16 was
identiﬁed to be a Th17-like program including IL17RB, IL17F, and
IL22 as well as IL10 and associated with STAT1, STAT3, and
SMAD1 as its regulators. Topic 16 was slightly enriched in z and
28z cells compared to BB z cells (Figures S9 and S10).
Antigen-Speciﬁc Activation of 4-1BB CAR T Cells Induces a
Distinct Program Shared in CD4 and CD8 Cells
In the program analysis, topic 11 was highly speci ﬁct oB B z CAR
T cells ( Figure 5 F; p value <10 /C016, KS test). Many of its top-scoring
genes corresponded to our previous observations of differentially ex-
pressed genes between BBz and 28z activated CAR T cells (Figure 5B;
Table S7 ), including HLA class II genes, CCR7, ENPP2, the TF
BATF3, and the TNF receptor-associated signaling molecule TRAF1
(Table S7 ), which were also identi ﬁed during the bulk sequencing
analysis ( Figures 3 A and S4). HLA class II genes (HLA-DR) were
also previously con ﬁrmed by ﬂow cytometry ( Figure 3C). The phys-
iological signi ﬁcance of this upregulation is not certain at this time.
Similar to our results, CCR7 has been well described to be induced
by 4-1BB signaling.
14 CCR7 has an impact on the formation of mem-
ory T cells.35,36 TRAF1 is thought to directly bind to the 4-1BB intra-
cellular domain during signaling, resulting in a positive feedback
loop.
37 A network analysis of topic 11 predicted NF- kB TFs and
TNFAIP3 (A20)38,39 as the regulators of this program ( Figure 5 G).
IL-21 was also present in the top 200 genes distinguishing topic 11
(Table S7), which we previously showed was also upregulated at the
protein level ( Figure 3 G), and is known to modulate memory and
effector T cell phenotypes. 27,40
Finally, to determine whether the genes induced by 4-1BB-containing
CARs were also induced after endogenous 4-1BB signaling,41 we used
the top genes de ﬁning topic 11 that were also differentially expressed
in at least one time point in BB z versus 28z CAR T cells to deﬁne a 4-
1BB gene signature. We then scored this signature in UT cells acti-
vated via their TCR and the 4-1BB ligand (4-1BBL) compared to their
TCR alone. We generated a K562 cell line expressing a membrane-
bound anti-CD3 scFv with or without 4-1BBL expression. As before,
we expanded UT T cells with beads for 7 days, rested them for 7 days,
activated them for 24 h with irradiated K562-anti-CD3 or K562-anti-
CD3/4-1BBL, and measured the 4-1BB signature expression with
nCounter. Although many of the genes in our 4-1BB signature
were induced by endogenous 4-1BB signaling, a subset was unique
Figure S8 and Table S7). (C) Degree of CD4 and CD8A expression in cells plotted in the tSNE as in (A). (D) Gene regulators discovered using network analysis of the top 100
genes in each topic. Transcription factors with a statistical association (FDR < 0.1) were plotted by /C0log(pval) for each topic of interest (see also Table S8). (E) T cell activation
signature expression level in cells plotted in the tSNE as in (A) (see Table S3 for activation signature). (F) Box-and-whisker plot and cumulative distribution plot of the topic 11
weights per cell across the different CAR T cell groups. (G) Network of predicted transcription factors identiﬁed and the genes they regulate in the 4- 1BB program (topic 11).
(H) UT T cells were stimulated for 24 h with irradiated K562 expressing aCD3 with or without 4-1BBL at a 1:1 effector-to-target cell ratio. Heatmap of 4-1BB CAR signature
genes in UT T cells stimulated with and without 4-1BBL (normalized by row) gene signatures. N = 3 normal donors.
Molecular Therapy
2586 Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020
to stimulated CAR T cells, including all the MHC class II genes and
ENPP2 ( Figure 5 H). We hypothesize that 4-1BB signaling from the
synthetic CAR molecule is strong enough to induce programs that
would otherwise not be induced in T cells, such as the MHC class
II molecules known to be upregulated after dendritic cell (DC) matu-
ration using 4-1BB/4-1BBL stimulation.
42,43 This may also be in part
due to constitutive expression of the 4-1BB intracellular signaling
domain when it is part of the CAR, in contrast to the activation-
dependent expression of the natural 4-1BB molecule.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we generated a transcriptional atlas of human CAR
T cells at rest and following activation to understand tonic and anti-
gen-dependent signaling mediated by the intracellular domains of
CARs. We found that CAR T cells have ligand-independent signaling,
prior to stimulation through their CAR, that varies based on the co-
stimulatory domain expressed. It is possible that this constitutive
signaling present with baseline CAR expression, along with signaling
changes that occur following CAR activation, could impact CAR
T cell phenotype, cell fate, and persistence depending on the co-stim-
ulatory domain that is used. The differences observed in this study
will help to develop hypotheses behind the clinical differences
observed in 4-1BB- and CD28-containing CARs, as well provide
guidance on how CAR T cells might be endowed or genetically modi-
ﬁed to enhance desirable properties in the future.
This work used two methods of sequencing with unbiased analyses to
determine the phenotypes of CAR T cells associated with different
CAR intracellular signaling domains. In both cases, we used genes
strongly expressed in cell clusters ( Figure 2 ) or topics ( Figure 5 )t o
assign phenotypes or properties to the cells based on the genes’ known
functions. By analyzing CAR T cells at rest, we were able to identify
memory T cell populations along with tonic signaling events speci ﬁc
to the CAR’s intracellular signaling domain (Figure 2). These distinc-
tions were made even clearer when analyzing activated CAR T cells
(Figures 3, 4, and 5). Many of the genes identi ﬁed as differentially ex-
pressed between BB z and 28z in the bulk RNA-seq and con ﬁrmed at
the protein level ( Figure 3) overlapped with genes in the scRNA-seq
topic that was unique to BB z cells (Figure 5, topic 11, genes in red).
Additionally, the Th cell polarization identiﬁed by bulk RNA-seq (Fig-
ure 4) was similarly discerned in the topic analysis ( Figure 5, topic 8).
Previous studies that identi ﬁed tonic signaling in CAR T cells used
CARs with different extracellular moieties that induced dramatic
functional changes in the T cell. These studies found that c-Met
and GD2-directed CAR T cells have ligand-independent signaling
during CAR T cell expansion, which results in changes in prolifera-
tion, cytokine production, and induced T cell exhaustion.
20,21 In these
studies, the CARs were undergoing clustering due to interactions be-
tween their extracellular domains, which was inducing downstream
signaling and measurable functional changes that did not occur in
CD19 CAR T cells. Therefore, it was hypothesized that scFvs with
different speci ﬁcities can induce tonic signaling, but that this does
not occur in CD19 CAR T cells.
Similar to these studies, we did not ﬁnd profound functional changes
in CD19 CAR T cells that are not activated.
44 To our knowledge,
previous studies have not assessed the transcriptional effects of
constitutive CAR expression in resting human T cells. However, we
hypothesized that every CAR induces some baseline signaling
changes simply from being expressed in a cell, even if it does not result
in dramatic functional changes prior to activation. To test this hy-
pothesis, we chose to examine transcriptional changes with CAR
expression in human T cells expressing functional and non-func-
tional CD3z domains prior to CAR-induced activation. This stringent
control allowed us to identify the presence of ligand-independent ac-
tivity at the transcriptional level from baseline CAR expression, and
we observed that the proﬁle was present in all CAR T cells transduced
with a functional CD3 z domain compared to the truncated Dz
domain. Although these changes were weaker than the strong func-
tional changes observed in c-Met and GD2 CARs, they became
more pronounced with CAR activation, suggesting the differences
observed with ligand-independent signaling can prime the cell for
the changes that occur after activation. This baseline signaling could
have meaningful implications as to how speci ﬁc CAR constructs will
behave in patients, prior to the CAR T cell interacting with its antigen
on the tumor and triggering activation.
We also identi ﬁed a ligand-independent signaling signature that was
speciﬁc to 4-1BB-expressing CARs both at the population and the sin-
gle-cell level. At rest, 41BB cells had increased markers associated with
CD8 central memory T cells and favored fatty acid metabolism, similar
to what has been shown previously in 4-1BB CAR T cells following acti-
vation.
14 These two characteristics have also been attributed to the
increased proliferation and persistence of BBz CAR T cells compared
to CD28z.14 Since we found these differences in resting CAR T cells,
it suggests that the degree of 4-1BB tonic signaling in CAR T cells could
have profound effects on the heterogeneity and functional state of the
cells even before they are administered to a patient.
Similarly, genes that differentially changed with CAR T cell activation
could be responsible for differences in 4-1BB CAR T cell persistence.
Following activation, we recovered a unique gene program induced in
4-1BB CAR T cells, including MHC class II genes ENPP2, CXCL10,
and CCR7 and the TFs BATF3 and JUNB. ENPP2 promotes prolifer-
ation in other cell types
28 and may have a similar effect in CAR T cells,
although this hypothesis remains to be explored. The predicted regu-
lators of the 4-1BB signature were NF- kB family members and A20.
Tonic signaling from NF- kB has been found to be critical for both T
and B cell longevity;
45,46 therefore, tonic signaling from the 4-1BB co-
stimulation domain in CAR T cells may similarly promote the
increased persistence seen in BBz CAR T cells. This extends on recent
ﬁndings showing the NF- kB is necessary for 4-1BB co-stimulatory
enhancement of CAR T cell function and that non-canonical NF-
kB activation by 4-1BB promotes CAR T cell survival.
47,48
The brisk upregulation of MHC class II on T cells with 4-1BB-con-
taining CARs was much higher than after activation of CARs that
did not contain 4-1BB (i.e., 28 z and z). The physiologic relevance
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020 2587
of this ﬁnding is unclear and is unlikely to have an impact on patients
receiving 4-1BB-based CAR T cell products, since CAR T cells would
be a miniscule population of the total antigen-presenting compart-
ment. Alternatively, we speculate that if CAR T cells were to be com-
bined with tumor vaccines, 4-1BB-based CARs may enhance epitope
spreading via increased antigen presentation. Furthermore, investiga-
tors and sponsors generating allogeneic “off-the-shelf” CAR T cells
may want to consider whether MHC class II upregulation could result
in increased rejection of CAR T cells.
Other aspects of these CAR T cells that could affect their phenotypes
in patients include differences in cytokines and cytokine receptors.
For example, IL21 and IL21R were upregulated in BB z CAR T cells.
IL-21 secretion from CD4
+ cells is known to support the formation
of memory CD8+ T cells, which could be important in the production
of a lasting anti-tumor CD8 + immune response 49 and may further
explain the increased persistence of BB z CARs. Additionally,
IL12RB2, which encodes a subunit of the IL-12 receptor, was
signiﬁcantly upregulated in BB z CARs. IL-12 is a pro-in ﬂammatory
cytokine that increases the anti-tumor potency of CAR T cells. 50
IL-12-secreting CARs with CD28 co-stimulatory domains are being
developed by various groups,
50 but these data suggest that BB z
CARs may be more sensitive to the additional IL-12.
Following stimulation, we also identiﬁed Th1 polarizing genes in BBz
CAR T cells by bulk sequencing, reﬂecting a shift across the entire cell
population. In contrast, 28 z CAR T cells induced Th2 polarizing
genes by bulk sequencing that was re ﬂective of a minor subset of cells
at the single-cell level, as identi ﬁed by topic 8 in the topic analysis.
Additionally, one of the key genes distinguishing the BB z-speciﬁc
topic (topic 11) was TRAF1, a known inhibitor of Th2 differentia-
tion.
51 This is similar to observations made in CARs directed toward
the solid tumor antigen GPC3, where BB z was associated with Th1
cytokines and CD28 z was associated with Th2. 52 This difference is
important because polarization affects the types of cytokines released
from T cells, which can mediate toxicities that occur with CAR T cell
treatment, such as cytokine release syndrome (CRS). Therefore, the
difference in cytokine pro ﬁles based on the CAR ’s co-stimulatory
domain may help re ﬁne the treatment of CRS based on the CAR
product causing the syndrome. Furthermore, Th1 CD4
+ T cells are
known to be important for CD8 + T cell activity and are required
for their anti-tumor activity; 50,53 therefore, a skew toward the Th1
phenotype could support CAR T cell ef ﬁcacy.
Many, but not all, of the genes in our CAR 4-1BB program were also
upregulated following endogenous 4-1BB signaling in UT T cells; a
subset was only induced when 4-1BB is activated in the context of a
CAR co-stimulatory domain. This highlights the importance of
studying these costimulatory programs in the context of a CAR
construct, which may induce additional signaling pathways that pro-
vide additional functions to BBz CAR T cells, such as antigen presen-
tation through MHC class II. The role that MHC class II genes have in
CAR T cell function remains to be explored but is intriguing since it
was identi ﬁed in both the bulk and single-cell sequencing and these
genes among the most signi ﬁcantly differentially expressed between
BBz and 28z CAR T cells at multiple time points.
Proﬁling of stimulated CAR T cells showed that while the same genes
are upregulated following TCR and CAR activation, TCR signaling in-
duces far stronger induction for the whole population and at the cell-
intrinsic level. This is consistent with other studies that have demon-
strated that CARs have poorer organization of the supramolecular acti-
vation cluster (SMAC) and fewer immunoreceptor tyrosine-based acti-
vation motifs (ITAMs) of the CD3 z chain compared to a full TCR
complex.
54 However, one caveat in the interpretation of these data is
that we used anti-CD3, a highly potent activator of the TCR, which
binds with higher afﬁnity than typical MHC-peptide binding.
One limitation to our study is that we focused on costimulation do-
mains of CAR constructs that bear resemblance to those in clinical
use, but do not represent commercial therapeutic products. For
example, our 28z CAR used a different vector and promoter than ax-
icabtagene ciloleucel, and the transmembrane domain was derived
from CD8a instead of CD28. Our BBz construct design closely resem-
bled the tisagenlecleucel transgene. We performed the analyses on
CAR T cells that were manufactured using one process, on a small
scale in plates, and in a research laboratory, not using a large-scale
manufacturing process in good manufacturing practice (GMP) facil-
ities. To better understand the speci ﬁc role of the costimulation do-
mains CD28 versus 4-1BB, we kept all of the other components of
our CAR T cells identical, in contrast to commercial products, which
use different manufacturing processes and have some variations in
the transgene design and vectors used.
Taken together, our data expand our understanding of how CAR
signaling domains affect the gene expression pro ﬁle, functional state,
and ultimate fate of engineered human T cells. They also highlight un-
expected differences between endogenous TCR and 4-1BB signaling
compared to 4-1BB signaling through a CAR. This information will
enhance CAR therapies by providing greater insight into the selection
and engineering of costimulatory domains that lead to changes in
gene expression. Knowing that these differences can be detected even
prior to the stimulation through the CAR provides a rationale for under-
standing a speci ﬁcC A R’s signaling phenotype at baseline, prior to
administration to the patient. Designing CARs with speci ﬁcs i g n a l i n g
domains to achieve a desired function could make CAR T cells more
effective in speciﬁc cancers where a particular proﬁle would be beneﬁcial.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Generation of CAR Lentiviral Vectors and Isolation of Human T
Cells
CD19- and EGFR-speci ﬁc CARs were synthesized and cloned into a
third-generation lentiviral plasmid backbone under the regulation of
a human EF-1a promoter (GenScript, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Replica-
tion-defective lentiviral vectors were produced by four plasmids co-
transfected into human embryonic kidney cell line 293 (HEK293T)
cells using TransIT-2020 transfection reagent (Mirus Bio, Madison,
WI, USA). Supernatants were collected 24 and 48 h after transfection
Molecular Therapy
2588 Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020
and ﬁltered. Virus was concentrated by ultracentrifugation. Vector
was harvested and stored at /C080/C14C. Healthy donor leukopaks were
obtained from the Blood Transfusion Services at Massachusetts Gen-
eral Hospital under an institutional review board (IRB)-approved
protocol to obtain discarded tissues. CD4
+ and CD8 + T cells were
negatively selected using RosetteSep kits with a Ficoll gradient
(STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada). For the bulk
RNA-seq experiments, enriched T cells were further puri ﬁed by
CD3
+CD4+ or CD3 +CD8+ using ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) with a BD FACSAria III (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA,
USA). CD4
+ and CD8 + T cells were mixed at a 1:1 ratio prior to
expansion. For single-cell experiments, T cells were used at the
donor-speciﬁc CD4/CD8 ratio.
Target Cell Lines
The HEK392T and Nalm6 cell lines were purchased from American
Tissue Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). Both cell
lines were expanded in RPMI 1640 with 1 /C2
L-GlutaMAX and
25 mM HEPES (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc, Waltham, MA,
USA) and supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine
serum (FBS, Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc). The U87 cell line
was from ATCC and expanded in Eagle ’s minimal essential medium
(EMEM) with 10% FBS. U87 cells were passaged with 0.05% trypsin
(Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc). Target cells were irradiated with
10,000 rad and frozen in FBS with 10% DMSO to be thawed prior
to stimulation of CAR T cells. K562 cells were transduced to express
anti-CD3 scFv and 4-1BBL as described previously.
55
T Cell In Vitro Expansion and Transduction for RNA-Seq
Bulk RNA-seq samples were collected from T cells of three donors
stimulated under the different conditions. T cells were plated in a
24-well plate at 1 million cells/mL in RPMI 1640 with 1 /C2L-Gluta-
MAX and 25 mM HEPES (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc) supple-
mented with 10% FBS and IL-2 (20 IU/mL; PeproTech, Rocky Hill,
NJ, USA). Anti-CD3/CD28 beads (Dynabeads; Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) were added with a 3:1 bead-to-cell ratio. T cells were
cultured for 1 day and then transduced with one of the four lentiviral
constructs at an MOI of 5. Cells were counted and maintained at 5e5/
mL with IL-2 replaced every 2 days during the bead expansion and
resting periods. Beads were removed on day 7 using a magnet, and
cells were rested for a further 7 days. T cells were checked for mCherry
expression and purity by ﬂow cytometry analysis on day 13. On day
14, each CAR T cell population was divided into ﬁve wells at 5e5 CAR
T cells/mL in a six-well plate and left unstimulated or stimulated with
Nalm6 (at a 1:1 effector-to-target ratio) or anti-CD3/CD28 beads (1:1
T cell-to-target/bead ratio) for 4 or 24 h prior to staining and sorting.
Cells were stained with CD3-FITC (UCHT1; BioLegend, San Diego,
CA, USA), CD4-Brilliant Violet 786 (BV786) (SK3; BD Biosciences),
CD8-allophycocyanin (APC)-H7 (SK1; BD Biosciences), and CD69-
APC (FN50; BioLegend). DAPI was added before FACS. Technical
duplicates of 5,000 cells were sorted on CD3
+, CD4 + or CD8 +, and
mCherry+ with a MoFlo Astrios EQ cell sorter (Beckman Coulter, In-
dianapolis, IN, USA) and resuspended in lysis buffer to be bulk
sequenced at the Broad Institute.
For single-cell RNA-seq, samples were generated from the same three
donors as the bulk RNA plus two new donors (donor 4 and donor 5).
The same CAR T cell subsets were generated except that the Dz
construct was not included in the experiment, and cells were either
left unstimulated or stimulated for 24 h with irradiated Nalm6 cells
prior to sorting. In addition to Nalm6 cell stimulation, the UTD sam-
ple was also stimulated for 24 h with K562 cells expressing anti-CD3
scFv. Both types of stimulation were at a 1:1 effector T cell/target cell
ratio. Following stimulation, T cells were sorted on a CD4
+ or CD8+
gate and mCherry+. All functional validation studies were performed
on CAR T cells generated from additional normal donors, as
described in the ﬁgure legends.
Flow Cytometry
All antibodies were purchased from BioLegend unless otherwise
stated. The following antibodies were used: HLA-DR-Paci ﬁc Blue
(PacBlue) (clone L243), CD4-FITC (clone OKT4), CD8-APC-H7
(clone SK1, BD Pharmingen), and PD1-Brilliant Violet (BV711)
(clone EH122H7). Cells were stained for 30 min in the dark at 4
/C14C
and washed twice in PBS with 2% FBS. DAPI was added for cell
viability directly before running ﬂow. We collected events on a
LSRFortessa X-20 (BD Biosciences) and analyzed the data with
FlowJo software (Tree Star, Ashland, OR, USA).
Bulk RNA-Seq
CAR T cells were collected using a FACS machine, resuspended at 200
cell/mL in lysis buffer comprised of TCL buffer (1031576; QIAGEN,
Hilden, Germany) plus 1% 2-mercaptoethanol (63689; Sigma-Al-
drich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and immediately frozen at /C080
/C14C.
For preparation of RNA-Seq libraries, cells were thawed (1,000 cells per
sample) and puri ﬁed with 2.2 /C2RNAClean SPRI beads (Beckman
Coulter) without a ﬁnal elution.56 RNA capture beads were air-dried
and processed immediately for cDNA synthesis. A SMART-Seq2 proto-
col was carried out as previously described
57 with minor modiﬁcations
in the reverse transcription step.58 Each PCR was performed in a 25-mL
reaction with 15 cycles for cDNA ampli ﬁcation. We used 0.25 ng of
cDNA of each sample and one-fourth of the standard Nextera XT reac-
tion volume in both the fragmentation and ﬁnal PCR ampli ﬁcation
steps. Up to 30 libraries were pooled per one NextSeq run (/C24500 million
reads) and sequenced 50 /C225 paired-end reads using a single kit on a
NextSeq 500 instrument (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA).
Bulk RNA-Seq Initial Read Alignment and QC
BAM ﬁles from bulk RNA-seq were converted to merged, demulti-
plexed FASTQ ﬁles. Reads were mapped to the UCSC hg19 human
transcriptome using Bowtie. 59 and transcripts-per-million (TPM)
values were calculated with RSEM v1.2.8 in paired-end mode. 60
Samples passed quality control (QC) if the number of aligned reads
was greater than 10
7, the percent of reads mapped was above 30%,
and the percent of rRNA was in the range of 10%–30%. We calculated
the correlation between technical duplicates and further interrogated
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020 2589
any duplicates with an r 2 <0.9. Duplicates were then averaged for
downstream analysis.
Single-Cell RNA-Seq
CAR T cells were sorted into PBS with 0.04% BSA, and live cells were
processed directly for droplet-based 3 0 end parallel scRNA-seq. We
used the 10x Genomics chromium single cell 3 0 library & gel bead
kit v2 according to the manufacturer ’s protocol (10x Genomics,
Pleasanton, CA, USA). An input of 10,000 T cells was added to
each 10 /C2channel with a median recovery of 4,051 cells. scRNA-
seq libraries were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq (132 bp reads)
at the Broad Institute Genomics Platform.
scRNA-Seq Initial Data Processing and QC
Gene counts were obtained by aligning reads to the human genome
GRCh38 using CellRanger software (v2.2) (10x Genomics, single
cell 3
0 v2)61. The scCloud pipeline62 was used for an overview analysis
and to create a Seurat_h5ad ﬁle that could be loaded into R as a Seurat
object for further QC and analysis. Seurat pipeline version 2.3.4 18 was
used to remove poor quality cells (200 < number of unique molecular
identiﬁers [nUMI] < 6,000 and ribosomal RNA <10% of the reads).
Reads were normalized using Seurat ’s normalization function based
on log normalization with a scale factor of 10,000. For each analysis
(all samples, resting samples, or CAR-stimulated samples) samples
were selected and batch corrected for donor variation. Seurat ’s Find-
VariableGenes() function was used to determine the variable genes.
Data were scaled using the ScaleData() function in Seurat using the
identiﬁed variable genes.
Batch Correction, Dimensionality Reduction, Clustering, and
Visualization
The union of the top 1,000 most variable genes from the samples in
each donor was used to run canonical correlation analysis (CCA) using
the RunCCA() function in Seurat. The donors ’ CCA subspaces were
aligned using the cca.aligned() dimensional reduction function in
Seurat, which was then used to run tSNE and for clustering purposes
with the following parameter settings: reduction.use = “cca.aligned,”
dims.use = 1:20, do.fast = T. Clustering was performed using Seurat
function FindClusters() with parameters: reduction.type = “cca.a-
ligned,” resolution = 0.6, dims.use = 1:20. Subsequent analysis
conﬁrmed that our results were not sensitive to the exact number of di-
mensions chosen. Violin plots were calculated using Seurat’s VlnPlot()
function on normalized gene expression values or signature scores.
G
2M and S phase gene signatures were calculated using Seurat ’s Cell-
CycleScoring() function, which calculates gene scores using a set of
deﬁned S phase and G
2M phase genes. 63 Other scores from gene
signatures de ﬁned were calculated by the methods described previ-
ously.64 Individual gene expression differences were calculated as
average log fold change, and p values were calculated using a Wil-
coxon rank sum test.
In Figure 2D, to bin the level of CD62L ( SELL) expression x of a clus-
ter, we used the average gene expression log
2 fold change (logFC) with
respect to the cluster with the highest CD62L expression y (cluster 3).
CD62Lhigh (log2(x/y) < 0.25), CD62L mid (0.25 < (log 2(x/y) < 0.5 and
adj-p < 1e /C050, Wilcoxon test), and CD62L low (log2(x/y) > 0.5, adj-
p<1 e /C050, Wilcoxon test)
Topic Modeling
We ﬁt an LDA topic model on the sparse matrix from the CAR-stim-
ulated samples that included all genes as described. 31 We calculated
topics for set K number of topics ranging from 4 to 20 with the toler-
ance parameter (Tol) set to 0.1. We chose K to be 16 by calculating the
Akaike and Bayesian information criteria for each K tested, and we set
K as the value where the Akaike information criterion (AIC) curve
changed from a steep gradient to a more gradual one. The “top n
genes” for a topic were generated by the CountClust function Extrac-
tTopFeatures(), which selects genes critical for separating one topic
from the others with the following parameters: top_features = n ,
method = “poisson,” options = “min,” shared = TRUE. Empirical cu-
mulative distribution function of the topic weights was calculated as
previously described.
65
Network Analysis
TF binding targets were downloaded from the RegNetwork database.33
TFs were associated with each topic by testing for the hypergeometric
enrichment of the TF-binding targets in the top 100 genes contributing
to that topic (identiﬁed by the function ExtractTopFeatures() described
under Topic Modeling). We report TFs showing statistically signiﬁcant
association (FDR < 0.1, Benjamini-Hochberg correction).
4-1BBL-Endogenous 4-1BB Stimulation Experiment
Pan T cells were expanded UT as described above with anti-CD3/CD28
beads and IL-2. Cells were frozen on day 14 and thawed 1 day before re-
stimulation into in R10 supplemented with IL-2 (20 IU/mL). UT cells
were co-cultured with irradiated K562-GFP-OKT3 or K562-GFP-
OKT3-4-1BBL at a 1:1 3e6 cells/6 mL in a six-well plate in R10. Co-cul-
tures were performed with three normal donors in technical duplicates
during 24 h, after which they were washed and resuspended in sorted
buffer with DAPI. Samples were sorted with 100,000 –200,000 cells
per sample from live, GFP
/C0 cells. RNA from sorted T cells was isolated
using the QIAGEN RNeasy Plus micro kit and loaded on the Nano-
String nCounter SPRINT instrument according to the manufacturer’s
instructions with the CAR T panel plus additional 4-1BB signature
probes (NanoString, Seattle, WA, USA). Data were analyzed using
nCounter software (NanoString). The 4-1BB signature gene set was
deﬁned as those genes that were both in the top 100 feature genes of
topic 11 and differentially expressed by RNA-seq during at least one
time point between BBz and 28z C A RTc e l l s .
Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as means± SEM as stated in theﬁgure legends. Un-
less speci ﬁcally indicated, comparison between different groups was
conducted with a two-tailed, paired Student’s t tests. Unless otherwise
stated, p values below 0.05 were considered signiﬁcant. If adjustments
for multiple comparisons were needed, they were performed using
the Holm-Bonferroni method, with adj-p <0.05 considered signiﬁcant.
Molecular Therapy
2590 Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020
Statistical analysis was performed with Prism (GraphPad, San Diego,
CA, USA), and Holm-Bonferroni adj-p and chi-square distribution
were calculated with R software package (Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc).
A Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to calculate p values for single-
cell gene expression data with the R software package.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ymthe.2020.07.023.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.C.B., N.D.M., R.C.L., A.R., O.R.-R., and M.V.M. designed the study.
A.C.B., N.D.M., R.C.L., A.P.C., L.S.R., and S.J.L. performed experi-
ments. A.C.B., N.D.M., K.G., C.B.M.P., O.A., G.S.-R., J.G., S.J.R.,
B.D.C., R.M., and L.J. analyzed data. A.C.B., T.R.B., A.R., and
M.V.M. wrote the manuscript. All authors edited and approved the
manuscript.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
A.R. is a member of the scienti ﬁc advisory board of Cambridge Epi-
Genetix. M.V.M. is a co-founder of Century Therapeutics and holds
equity in the company; M.V.M. also has equity in TCR2 and is a
consultant for multiple CAR T cell companies. The remaining au-
thors declare no competing interests.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Leslie Gaffney and Jennifer Rood for help in
manuscript preparation, as well as the Broad Flow Cytometry Facility
and the Flow Cytometry Core. M.V.M. was supported by NIH
CA166039, the Gabrielle ’s Angel Foundation, and V Foundation.
A.C.B. was supported by NIH 5T32AI118692-02. We thank the Klar-
man Cell Observatory for sequencing support.
REFERENCES
1. Kalos, M., Levine, B.L., Porter, D.L., Katz, S., Grupp, S.A., Bagg, A., and June, C.H.
(2011). T cells with chimeric antigen receptors have potent antitumor effects and
can establish memory in patients with advanced leukemia. Sci. Transl. Med.3, 95ra73.
2. Brentjens, R.J., Davila, M.L., Riviere, I., Park, J., Wang, X., Cowell, L.G., Bartido, S.,
Stefanski, J., Taylor, C., Olszewska, M., et al. (2013). CD19-targeted T cells rapidly
induce molecular remissions in adults with chemotherapy-refractory acute lympho-
blastic leukemia. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 177ra38.
3. Grupp, S.A., Kalos, M., Barrett, D., Aplenc, R., Porter, D.L., Rheingold, S.R., Teachey,
D.T., Chew, A., Hauck, B., Wright, J.F., et al. (2013). Chimeric antigen receptor-
modiﬁed T cells for acute lymphoid leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 1509–1518.
4. Kochenderfer, J.N., Dudley, M.E., Kassim, S.H., Somerville, R.P., Carpenter, R.O.,
Stetler-Stevenson, M., Yang, J.C., Phan, G.Q., Hughes, M.S., Sherry, R.M., et al.
(2015). Chemotherapy-refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and indolent B-
cell malignancies can be effectively treated with autologous T cells expressing an
anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 540–549.
5. Hamza, T., Barnett, J.B., and Li, B. (2010). Interleukin 12 a key immunoregulatory
cytokine in infection applications. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 11, 789–806.
6. Maude, S.L., Frey, N., Shaw, P.A., Aplenc, R., Barrett, D.M., Bunin, N.J., Chew, A.,
Gonzalez, V.E., Zheng, Z., Lacey, S.F., et al. (2014). Chimeric antigen receptor
T cells for sustained remissions in leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 371,1 5 0 7–1517.
7. Davila, M.L., Riviere, I., Wang, X., Bartido, S., Park, J., Curran, K., Chung, S.S.,
Stefanski, J., Borquez-Ojeda, O., Olszewska, M., et al. (2014). Ef ﬁcacy and toxicity
management of 19-28z CAR T cell therapy in B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 224ra25.
8. Neelapu, S.S., Locke, F.L., Bartlett, N.L., Lekakis, L.J., Miklos, D.B., Jacobson, C.A.,
Braunschweig, I., Oluwole, O.O., Siddiqi, T., Lin, Y., et al. (2017). Axicabtagene cilo-
leucel CAR T-cell therapy in refractory large B-cell lymphoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 377,
2531–2544.
9. Schuster, S.J., Svoboda, J., Chong, E.A., Nasta, S.D., Mato, A.R., Anak, Ö., Brogdon,
J.L., Pruteanu-Malinici, I., Bhoj, V., Landsburg, D., et al. (2017). Chimeric antigen re-
ceptor T cells in refractory B-cell lymphomas. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 2545–2554.
10. Chen, L., and Flies, D.B. (2013). Molecular mechanisms of T cell co-stimulation and
co-inhibition. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 227–242.
11. Schuster, S.J., Bishop, M.R., Tam, C.S., Waller, E.K., Borchmann, P., McGuirk, J.P.,
Jäger, U., Jaglowski, S., Andreadis, C., Westin, J.R., et al.; JULIET Investigators
(2019). Tisagenlecleucel in adult relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
N. Engl. J. Med. 380,4 5–56.
12. van der Stegen, S.J., Hamieh, M., and Sadelain, M. (2015). The pharmacology of sec-
ond-generation chimeric antigen receptors. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 14, 499–509.
13. Porter, D.L., Hwang, W.T., Frey, N.V., Lacey, S.F., Shaw, P.A., Loren, A.W., Bagg, A.,
Marcucci, K.T., Shen, A., Gonzalez, V., et al. (2015). Chimeric antigen receptor T cells
persist and induce sustained remissions in relapsed refractory chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 303ra139.
14. Kawalekar, O.U., O ’Connor, R.S., Fraietta, J.A., Guo, L., McGettigan, S.E., Posey,
A.D., Jr., Patel, P.R., Guedan, S., Scholler, J., Keith, B., et al. (2016). Distinct signaling
of coreceptors regulates speciﬁc metabolism pathways and impacts memory develop-
ment in CAR T cells. Immunity 44, 380–390.
15. Guedan, S., Posey, A.D., Jr., Shaw, C., Wing, A., Da, T., Patel, P.R., McGettigan, S.E.,
Casado-Medrano, V., Kawalekar, O.U., Uribe-Herranz, M., et al. (2018). Enhancing
CAR T cell persistence through ICOS and 4-1BB costimulation. JCI Insight 3, e96976.
16. Paulos, C.M., Carpenito, C., Plesa, G., Suhoski, M.M., Varela-Rohena, A., Golovina,
T.N., Carroll, R.G., Riley, J.L., and June, C.H. (2010). The inducible costimulator
(ICOS) is critical for the development of human T
H17 cells. Sci. Transl. Med. 2,
55ra78.
17. Zhong, X.S., Matsushita, M., Plotkin, J., Riviere, I., and Sadelain, M. (2010). Chimeric
antigen receptors combining 4-1BB and CD28 signaling domains augment
PI3kinase/AKT/Bcl-X
L activation and CD8 + T cell-mediated tumor eradication.
Mol. Ther. 18, 413–420.
18. Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E., and Satija, R. (2018). Integrating sin-
gle-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species.
Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411–420.
19. Yang, Y., Kohler, M.E., Chien, C.D., Sauter, C.T., Jacoby, E., Yan, C., Hu, Y.,
Wanhainen, K., Qin, H., and Fry, T.J. (2017). TCR engagement negatively affects
CD8 but not CD4 CAR T cell expansion and leukemic clearance. Sci. Transl. Med.
9, eaag1209.
20. Long, A.H., Haso, W.M., Shern, J.F., Wanhainen, K.M., Murgai, M., Ingaramo, M.,
Smith, J.P., Walker, A.J., Kohler, M.E., Venkateshwara, V.R., et al. (2015). 4-1BB cos-
timulation ameliorates T cell exhaustion induced by tonic signaling of chimeric an-
tigen receptors. Nat. Med. 21, 581–590.
21. Frigault, M.J., Lee, J., Basil, M.C., Carpenito, C., Motohashi, S., Scholler, J., Kawalekar,
O.U., Guedan, S., McGettigan, S.E., Posey, A.D., Jr., et al. (2015). Identi ﬁcation of
chimeric antigen receptors that mediate constitutive or inducible proliferation of
T cells. Cancer Immunol. Res. 3,3 5 6–367.
22. Taipale, K., Liikanen, I., Juhila, J., Karioja-Kallio, A., Oksanen, M., Turkki, R., Linder,
N., Lundin, J., Ristimäki, A., Kanerva, A., et al. (2015). T-cell subsets in peripheral
blood and tumors of patients treated with oncolytic adenoviruses. Mol. Ther. 23,
964–973.
23. Jameson, S.C., and Masopust, D. (2018). Understanding subset diversity in T cell
memory. Immunity 48, 214–226.
24. Farber, D.L., Yudanin, N.A., and Restifo, N.P. (2014). Human memory T cells: gen-
eration, compartmentalization and homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14,2 4–35.
25. Boise, L.H., Minn, A.J., Noel, P.J., June, C.H., Accavitti, M.A., Lindsten, T., and
Thompson, C.B. (1995). CD28 costimulation can promote T cell survival by
enhancing the expression of Bcl-X
L. Immunity 3,8 7–98.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020 2591
26. Xin, G., Schauder, D.M., Lainez, B., Weinstein, J.S., Dai, Z., Chen, Y., Esplugues, E.,
Wen, R., Wang, D., Parish, I.A., et al. (2015). A critical role of IL-21-induced BATF in
sustaining CD8-T-cell-mediated chronic viral control. Cell Rep. 13, 1118–1124.
27. Loschinski, R., Böttcher, M., Stoll, A., Bruns, H., Mackensen, A., and Mougiakakos, D.
(2018). IL-21 modulates memory and exhaustion phenotype of T-cells in a fatty acid
oxidation-dependent manner. Oncotarget 9, 13125–13138.
28. Cholia, R.P., Nayyar, H., Kumar, R., and Mantha, A.K. (2015). Understanding the
multifaceted role of ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 2 (ENPP2)
and its altered behaviour in human diseases. Curr. Mol. Med. 15, 932–943.
29. Lund, R., Aittokallio, T., Nevalainen, O., and Lahesmaa, R. (2003). Identi ﬁcation of
novel genes regulated by IL-12, IL-4, or TGF- b during the early polarization of
CD4
+ lymphocytes. J. Immunol. 171, 5328–5336.
30. Athie-Morales, V., Smits, H.H., Cantrell, D.A., and Hilkens, C.M. (2004). Sustained
IL-12 signaling is required for Th1 development. J. Immunol. 172,6 1–69.
31. Bielecki, P., Riesenfeld, S.J., Kowalczyk, M.S., Amezcua Vesely, M.C., Kroehling, L.,
Yaghoubi, P., et al. (2018). Skin in ﬂammation driven by differentiation of quiescent
tissue-resident ILCs into a spectrum of pathogenic effectors. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/
10.1101/461228.
32. Geginat, J., Paroni, M., Maglie, S., Alfen, J.S., Kastirr, I., Gruarin, P., De Simone, M.,
Pagani, M., and Abrignani, S. (2014). Plasticity of human CD4 T cell subsets. Front.
Immunol. 5, 630.
33. Liu, Z.-P., Wu, C., Miao, H., and Wu, H. (2015). RegNetwork: an integrated database
of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory networks in human and mouse.
Database (Oxford) 2015, bav095.
34. Strempel, J.M., Grenningloh, R., Ho, I.C., and Vercelli, D. (2010). Phylogenetic and
functional analysis identiﬁes Ets-1 as a novel regulator of the Th2 cytokine gene locus.
J. Immunol. 184, 1309–1316.
35. Moschovakis, G.L., and Förster, R. (2012). Multifaceted activities of CCR7 regulate T-
cell homeostasis in health and disease. Eur. J. Immunol. 42, 1949–1955.
36. Jung, Y.W., Kim, H.G., Perry, C.J., and Kaech, S.M. (2016). CCR7 expression alters
memory CD8 T-cell homeostasis by regulating occupancy in IL-7- and IL-15-depen-
dent niches. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 8278–8283.
37. Zapata, J.M., Perez-Chacon, G., Carr-Baena, P., Martinez-Forero, I., Azpilikueta, A.,
Otano, I., and Melero, I. (2018). CD137 (4-1BB) signalosome: complexity is a matter
of TRAFs. Front. Immunol. 9, 2618.
38. Li, L., Soetandyo, N., Wang, Q., and Ye, Y. (2009). The zinc ﬁnger protein A20 targets
TRAF2 to the lysosomes for degradation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1793, 346–353.
39. Shembade, N., Ma, A., and Harhaj, E.W. (2010). Inhibition of NF- kB signaling by
A20 through disruption of ubiquitin enzyme complexes. Science 327, 1135–1139.
40. Wang, J., Hasan, F., Frey, A.C., Li, H.S., Park, J., Pan, K., Haymaker, C., Bernatchez,
C., Lee, D.A., Watowich, S.S., and Yee, C. (2020). Histone deacetylase inhibitors and
IL21 cooperate to reprogram human effector CD8
+ T cells to memory T cells. Cancer
Immunol. Res. 8, 794–805.
41. Maus, M.V., Thomas, A.K., Leonard, D.G.B., Allman, D., Addya, K., Schlienger, K.,
Riley, J.L., and June, C.H. (2002). Ex vivo expansion of polyclonal and antigen-spe-
ciﬁc cytotoxic T lymphocytes by arti ﬁcial APCs expressing ligands for the T-cell re-
ceptor, CD28 and 4-1BB. Nat. Biotechnol. 20, 143–148.
42. Kim, Y.J., Li, G., and Broxmeyer, H.E. (2002). 4-1BB ligand stimulation enhances
myeloid dendritic cell maturation from human umbilical cord blood CD34
+ progen-
itor cells. J. Hematother. Stem Cell Res. 11, 895–903.
43. Macdonald, D.C., Hotblack, A., Akbar, S., Britton, G., Collins, M.K., and Rosenberg,
W.C. (2014). 4-1BB ligand activates bystander dendritic cells to enhance immuniza-
tion in trans. J. Immunol. 193, 5056–5064.
44. Scarfò, I., Ormhøj, M., Frigault, M.J., Castano, A.P., Lorrey, S., Bouffard, A.A., van
Scoyk, A., Rodig, S.J., Shay, A.J., Aster, J.C., et al. (2018). Anti-CD37 chimeric antigen
receptor T cells are active against B- and T-cell lymphomas. Blood 132, 1495–1506.
45. Pasparakis, M., Schmidt-Supprian, M., and Rajewsky, K. (2002). I kB kinase signaling
is essential for maintenance of mature B cells. J. Exp. Med. 196, 743–752.
46. Knudson, K.M., Pritzl, C.J., Saxena, V., Altman, A., Daniels, M.A., and Teixeiro, E.
(2017). NF kB-Pim-1-Eomesodermin axis is critical for maintaining CD8 T-cell
memory quality. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, E1659–E1667.
47. Philipson, B.I., O ’Connor, R.S., May, M.J., June, C.H., Albelda, S.M., and Milone,
M.C. (2020). 4-1BB costimulation promotes CAR T cell survival through noncanon-
ical NF-kB signaling. Sci. Signal. 13, eaay8248.
48. Li, G., Boucher, J.C., Kotani, H., Park, K., Zhang, Y., Shrestha, B., Wang, X., Guan, L.,
Beatty, N., Abate-Daga, D., and Davila, M.L. (2018). 4-1BB enhancement of CAR T
function requires NF- kB and TRAFs. JCI Insight 3, e121322.
49. Tian, Y., Cox, M.A., Kahan, S.M., Ingram, J.T., Bakshi, R.K., and Zajac, A.J. (2016). A
context-dependent role for IL-21 in modulating the differentiation, distribution, and
abundance of effector and memory CD8 T cell subsets. J. Immunol. 196, 2153–2166.
50. Pegram, H.J., Lee, J.C., Hayman, E.G., Imperato, G.H., Tedder, T.F., Sadelain, M., and
Brentjens, R.J. (2012). Tumor-targeted T cells modiﬁed to secrete IL-12 eradicate sys-
temic tumors without need for prior conditioning. Blood 119, 4133–4141.
51. Bryce, P.J., Oyoshi, M.K., Kawamoto, S., Oettgen, H.C., and Tsitsikov, E.N. (2006).
TRAF1 regulates T
h2 differentiation, allergic in ﬂammation and nuclear localization
of the T h2 transcription factor, NIP45. Int. Immunol. 18, 101–111.
52. Li, W., Guo, L., Rathi, P., Marinova, E., Gao, X., Wu, M.F., Liu, H., Dotti, G.,
Gottschalk, S., Metelitsa, L.S., and Heczey, A. (2017). Redirecting T cells to glypi-
can-3 with 4-1BB zeta chimeric antigen receptors results in Th1 polarization and
potent antitumor activity. Hum. Gene Ther. 28, 437–448.
53. Terhune, J., Berk, E., and Czerniecki, B.J. (2013). Dendritic cell-induced Th1 and
Th17 cell differentiation for cancer therapy. Vaccines (Basel) 1, 527–549.
54. Davenport, A.J., Cross, R.S., Watson, K.A., Liao, Y., Shi, W., Prince, H.M., Beavis,
P.A., Trapani, J.A., Kershaw, M.H., Ritchie, D.S., et al. (2018). Chimeric antigen re-
ceptor T cells form nonclassical and potent immune synapses driving rapid cytotox-
icity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, E2068–E2076.
55. Boroughs, A.C., Larson, R.C., Choi, B.D., Bouffard, A.A., Riley, L.S., Schiferle, E.,
Kulkarni, A.S., Cetrulo, C.L., Ting, D., Blazar, B.R., et al. (2019). Chimeric antigen re-
ceptor costimulation domains modulate human regulatory T cell function. JCI
Insight 5, e126194.
56. Shalek, A.K., Satija, R., Adiconis, X., Gertner, R.S., Gaublomme, J.T., Raychowdhury,
R., Schwartz, S., Yosef, N., Malboeuf, C., Lu, D., et al. (2013). Single-cell transcriptom-
ics reveals bimodality in expression and splicing in immune cells. Nature 498,
236–240.
57. Picelli, S., Faridani, O.R., Björklund, A.K., Winberg, G., Sagasser, S., and Sandberg, R.
(2014). Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-seq2. Nat. Protoc. 9,
171–181.
58. Ding, J., Adiconis, X., Simmons, S.K., Kowalczyk, M.S., Hession, C.C., Marjanovic,
N.D., Hughes, T.K., Wadsworth, M.H., Burks, T., Nguyen, L.T., et al. (2019).
Systematic comparative analysis of single cell RNA-sequencing methods. bioRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/632216.
59. Langmead, B., Trapnell, C., Pop, M., and Salzberg, S.L. (2009). Ultrafast and memory-
efﬁcient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 10,
R25.
60. Li, B., and Dewey, C.N. (2011). RSEM: accurate transcript quanti ﬁcation from RNA-
seq data with or without a reference genome. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 323.
61. 10x Genomics. Cell Ranger. https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-
expression/software/pipelines/latest/what-is-cell-ranger.
62. Li, B., Sarkizova, S., Gould, J., Tabaka, M., Ashenberg, O., et al. (2020). Single cell
Cloud tools (scCloud), https://sccloud.readthedocs.io/en/stable/.
63. Tirosh, I., Izar, B., Prakadan, S.M., Wadsworth, M.H., 2nd, Treacy, D., Trombetta, J.J.,
Rotem, A., Rodman, C., Lian, C., Murphy, G., et al. (2016). Dissecting the multicel-
lular ecosystem of metastatic melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 352,
189–196.
64. Jerby-Arnon, L., Shah, P., Cuoco, M.S., Rodman, C., Su, M.J., Melms, J.C., Leeson, R.,
Kanodia, A., Mei, S., Lin, J.-R., et al. (2018). A cancer cell program promotes T cell
exclusion and resistance to checkpoint blockade. Cell 175, 984–997.e24.
65. Xu, H., Ding, J., Porter, C.B.M., Wallrapp, A., Tabaka, M., Ma, S., Fu, S., Guo, X.,
Riesenfeld, S.J., Su, C., et al. (2019). Transcriptional atlas of intestinal immune cells
reveals that neuropeptide a-CGRP modulates group 2 innate lymphoid cell re-
sponses. Immunity 51, 696–708.e9.
Molecular Therapy
2592 Molecular Therapy Vol. 28 No 12 December 2020
YMTHE, Volume 28
Supplemental Information
A Distinct Transcriptional Program
in Human CAR T Cells Bearing the 4-1BB
Signaling Domain Revealed by scRNA-Seq
Angela C. Boroughs, Rebecca C. Larson, Nemanja D. Marjanovic, Kirk Gosik, Ana P.
Castano, Caroline B.M. Porter, Selena J. Lorrey, Orr Ashenberg, Livnat Jerby, Matan
Hofree, Gabriela Smith-Rosario, Robert Morris, Joshua Gould, Lauren S. Riley, Trisha
R. Berger, Samantha J. Riesenfeld, Orit Rozenblatt-Rosen, Bryan D. Choi, Aviv
Regev, and Marcela V . Maus










	 1 
Supplemental Information  Supplemental Figure Legends Figure S1. Vector maps of EGFR CAR constructs.  Vector maps of EGFR CAR constructs (TM, hinge and transmembrane domain; L, leader sequence).  Figure S2. Generation of CAR T cell profiles for Figure 1 with quality and batch correction.  A) Representative transduction efficiency of CAR constructs from Figure 1 determined by mCherry expression and CD3 surface expression on day 13. B) mCherry MFI of CAR T cells measured on day 13, N = 6 normal donors. Paired-ratio student t-test, NS - p>0.1. C) Luciferase-based killing assay with different numbers of CD19 CAR T cells co-cultured with 10,000 CD19+ target cells (Nalm6 CBG-GFP) at indicated CAR T cell-to-target ratio for 16 hours. N = 3 normal donors with technical triplicates. D) Number of individual unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) and the percent mitochondrial genes sequenced per sample from Figure 1C loaded on the 10x. E) tSNE of scRNA-seq T cell profiles from Figure 1C colored by donor pre- and post-CCA alignment (batch correction). F) Principal component analysis performed on a representative donor (donor 2) bulk RNAseq samples. G) Principal component analysis of bulk (donor 1-3; Figure 1B) and summed single cell data (donor 4 and 5; Figure 1C) after LIMMA correction for donor/sequencing method batch effects. Samples (data points) colored by donor and condition (top panel) or CD4 vs. CD8 (bottom panel).  Figure S3. Tonic Signaling signature in EGFR and CD19 CAR T cells. EGFR CAR T cells made with the constructs from Figure S1 were sorted on CD8+mCherry+ cells after 7 days of bead expansion and 7 days of rest. After sorting, RNA was isolated followed by reverse transcription to cDNA. Digital droplet PCR of genes upregulated (A to E) and downregulated (F and G) in our signature for tonic signaling from CD3ζ (Figure 2A) was performed. N=4 normal donors, mean and SEM plotted. Significance was determined with a paired-ratio student t-test comparing BBz and z to Dz and correcting for two comparisons with Holm-Bonferroni method adjustment. Genes are expressed relative to internal reference gene TBP. * adj-p<0.05 **adj-p<0.01. H) tSNE of scRNA-seq T cell profiles from no stimulation conditions colored by donor after CCA batch correction. I) Number of individual UMIs and the percent mitochondrial genes sequenced per cluster from the unstimulated samples described in Figure 2B.  Figure S4. DE genes from bulk RNA-seq between BBζ and 28ζ CAR T cells. A) Volcano plot of log fold-change genes expression on the x axis and –log10(p value) on the y axis between CD19 BBζ and 28ζ CAR T cells at 0 and 4 hours post-Nalm6 activation in CD4+ and CD8+ cells. Genes with FDR<0.05 are plotted in red. Positive x-axis is up in BBζ vs. 28ζ (see Figure 3A for 24 hour time point; Table S5 for gene lists). B) Classification of types of significantly differentially expressed genes at 24 hours after Nalm6 stimulation detected by bulk RNA-seq with an FDR<0.1 between BBζ and 28ζ CARs using GO annotation.  Figure S5. BBζ CARs have increase fatty acid metabolism before activation. GSEA of hallmark fatty acid metabolism genes in rank fold-change list of DE genes between bulk RNA-seq profiles of CD19 BBζ and 28ζ CAR T cells at 0 hours and 4 hours post CAR activation with irradiated Nalm6 cells.   Figure S6. DE genes from bulk RNA-seq between BBζ and ζ CAR T cells Volcano plot of log fold-change genes expression on the x axis and –log10(p value) on the y axis between CD19 BBζ and ζ CAR T cells at 0, 4 and 24hours post-Nalm6 activation in CD4+ and CD8+ cells. Genes with FDR<0.05 are plotted in red. Positive x-axis is up in BBζ vs. ζ. Figure S7. Bulk RNAseq profiles indicate cytokine and cytokine receptor differences in BBζ and 28ζ CAR T cells. Normalized gene expression in CD4+ and CD8+ in BBζ and 28ζ CD19 CAR T cells activated with irradiated Nalm6 of A) IL23R - IL-23 receptor, B) IL12RB2 - IL-12 receptor and C) ENPP2 – autotaxin. N= 3 normal donors. Mean and SEM plotted with points showing individual donor values. Adj-p values were calculated by DEseq2 using Holm-Bonferroni correction (see also Figure 3F). D) Bulk gene expression of PDCD1 (encoding the PD1 protein) in CD8+ CD19 CAR T cells with Nalm6 stimulation over 
	 2 
time. Dots represent the individual donor samples. Mean and SEM plotted, * adj-p<0.05. E) GSEA of early polarizing TH1 signature genes scored across the rank fold-change list of DE genes between BBζ(+) and 28ζ CAR T cells at the 0 hour time point (see also Figure 4A). F) IL-5 measured in the supernatants of bulk CD4+/CD8+ EGFR CAR T cells stimulated for 24 hours with irradiated U87 at a 2:1 effector to target ratio (see Figure C-D for IL-4). N=3 normal donors, mean and SEM plotted. * p<0.05.  Figure S8. Topics analysis of Nalm6 stimulated CAR T cells. Topics discovered by LDA (setting K parameter to 16) of single cell data from CD19-CAR BBζ, ζ, and 28ζ T cells 24 hours after Nalm6 stimulation. The tSNEs are colored by the weight of the given topic in each cell (see also Figure 5B, Table S7).  Figure S9. Topics enrichment across Nalm6 stimulated CAR T cells with different costimulation domains. Box and whiskers plot of topic weights of a given topic in scRNAseq profiles of cells separated by CAR T cell group after 24 hour stimulation with Nalm6 cells at a 1:1 effector:target ratio. Figure S10. CDF of topics across Nalm6 stimulated CAR T cells. ScRNAseq profiles were used to plot the cumulative distribution plot of each topic weights per cell across the different CAR T cell groups after 24 hour stimulation with Nalm6 cells at a 1:1 effector:target ratio. Supplemental Tables See Excel files online for full Supplemental Tables.  Supplemental Methods Raw data “scrubbing” for removal of donor specific SNPs  Removal of donor specific SNPs was required by the IRB to de-identify the sequencing information from anonymous human donors, since we obtained discarded tissues under an IRB-approved protocol. Both single cell and bulk RNA-Seq reads were scrubbed to maintain gene expression levels whilst simultaneously removing any donor specific SNPs before uploading to the uploading to the SRA database, accession number PRJNA554339. To this end, fastq files were aligned with STAR aligner1 to output a BAM file of aligned reads and a splice junction file. Splice junctions were then added to the reference genome for each sample and then realigned with STAR resulting in a BAM file with splice aware alignment.   The file was used for variant calling using the Genome Analysis Tool Kit (GATK)2 such that each variant could be identified. Reads including variants were replaced with a corresponding reference read containing no identifiable SNPs. Post processing of the alignment was done by the SplitNCigarReads tool in GATK to split and trim intronic reads. Freebayes3 was run using the GRCh38 as the reference genome to identify the sites of variants. These sites were then identified in the STAR aligned BAM file and a vcf file created from variants being called from the BAM file. A custom script took the vcf file and identified each point of variation in the BAM file. If the position had an alternative allele it was flipped to the reference nucleotide. If there is no variant in the position or the reference allele is present the read was written as is. This output a new BAM file which was converted to a newly scrubbed fastq file.   Bulk RNA-Seq PCA and differential gene expression Differentially expressed genes were identified using the DEseq2 R package4, after correcting for the effect of different patient donors. P-values were corrected for multiple hypotheses testing using the Benjamini & Hochberg (1995) method. Genes with an FDR (q-value) less than 0.05 were considered significant. PCA plots were constructed by DESeq using linear model batch corrected data from LIMMA R package5. The contribution of each covariate on the principle components was calculated using the SWAMP R package6. Row normalized (Complete linkage, average linkage, ward method), heat maps were constructed using the 
	 3 
gene expression (TPM) data generated by RSEM. Genes were classified using their Gene ontology annotation7, 8 and the gene cards database (www.genecards.org).   Gene Set Enrichment Analysis Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed at each time point against a gene list of early polarizing TH1 genes9 with the Deseq2 generated DE gene lists ranked by log2(fold change). Analysis was performed using the desktop GSEA (v3.0). To identify MSigDB10 gene sets enriched in significantly differentially expressed genes (FDR<0.05) between any two CARs we ran the GSEA software11.  Bulk expression from single cell samples  Bulk expression levels were generated form single cell transcriptomes by first binning cells into a CD8 group based on the cell’s expression of CD8A and not CD4 or vice versa for the CD4 group. The gene expression was then summed across 1000 randomly chosen cells per condition. The bulked expression from single cells for donor 4 and 5 were combined with the true bulk expression profiles from donors 1-3 and PCA was run with LIMMA correction for donor variation5.   Cytokine detection of stimulated T cells For cytokine release assays, T cells were stimulated in a 96 well plates with 100 000 T effector cells/well combined with irradiated target cells at a CAR T cell-to-target ratio of 1:1 for Nalm6 targets and 2:1 for U87 targets. Supernatants were harvested after 24 hours and frozen at –80C. Supernatants were analyzed for cytokine levels using FLEXMAP 3D® platform from Lumina Instrumentation (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions with a panel of the following cytokines: IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL12p70, IL-13, IL-18, IFN-γ, GM-CSF, TNF-α, IL-10 and IL-21. Plates were read using xPONENT Software 4.1. All samples were in measured in technical triplicates and with N=3 normal donors. Triplicates measured were averaged before graphing with Prism (Graphpad software). Cytotoxicity Assay CD19 CAR T cells were normalized to equal %CAR+ by adding UT cells. CAR T cells were titrated in 96 well plates co-cultured with 10,000 Nalm6 CBG-GFP tumor cells/well. After 16 hours in culture, tumor cells were lysed and luciferin (Promega) was added. Luciferase activity was measured with a Synergy Neo2 luminescence microplate reader (Biotek).  Percent cytotoxicity was calculated by the following equation: %cytotoxicity = (total RLU / target cells only RLU) x100.  Digital Droplet PCR EGFR CAR T cells were transduced, expanded and rested for 7 days. 5e5 cells were collected by FACs and resuspended in 350μl RLT buffer with 1% 2-mercaptoethanol. RNA was extracted and purified using RNAeasy kit (Qiagen) and cDNA was generated from 270ng of RNA/ 20μl reaction using iScript Reverse Transcription supermix (Bio-Rad). Digital Droplet PCR was performed using ddPCR supermix with no dUTPs (Bio-Rad) with a QX200 Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR™) System (Bio-Rad) platform for quantification. Droplet generation, PCR and detection of positive droplets were performed according to manufacturer’s instructions (Instruction Manual, QX200™ Droplet Generator – Bio-Rad).  The cycling protocol was according the manufacturer’s instructions with a 57°C melting temperature. Human TBP was used at as the reference gene in each reaction, (HEX fluorophore : TBP PrimePCR™ ddPCR™ Expression Probe Assay:Unique Assay ID: dHsaCPE5058363 (Bio-Rad)). The following FAM fluorophore primer probes were used (IDT PrimeTime Std® qPCR Assay).  
	 4 
Gene Primer/Probe CTLA4 PrimeTime Primer 1: CGG ACC TCA GTG GCT TTG  PrimeTime Primer 2: TTC ATC CCT GTC TTC TGC AA 
 PrimeTime Probe: /56-FAM/CG CCA GCT T/Zen/T GTG TGT GAG TAT GC/3IABkFQ GZMB PrimeTime Primer 1: CAG AGA CTT CTG ATC CCA GAT  PrimeTime Primer 2: TCC TGA GAA GAT GCA ACC AAT 
 PrimeTime Probe: /56-FAM/CC CGC CCC T/Zen/A CAT GGC TTA TCT /3IABkFQ/ SOCS2 PrimeTime Primer 1: GAT ATT GTT AGT AGG TAG TCT GAA TGC  PrimeTime Primer 2: GGA GCT CGG TCA GAC AG 
 PrimeTime Probe: /56-FAM/AA AGA GGC A/Zen/C CAG AAG GAA CTT TCT TGA /3IABkFQ/ SDC4 PrimeTime Primer 1: GGT ACA TGA GCA GTA GGA TCA G  PrimeTime Primer 2: GCA GCA ACA TCT TTG AGA GAA C 
 PrimeTime Probe: /56-FAM/CC ACG ATG C/Zen/C ACC CAC AAT CAG A/3IABkFQ/ GGT1 PrimeTime Primer 1: TTC AGG TCC TCA GCT GTC A  PrimeTime Primer 2: TGG CTG ACA CCT ACG AGA C 
 PrimeTime Probe: /56-FAM/CC GCC TGG A/Zen/T GTC CTT CAC AAT CT/3IABkFQ/ TNFRSF10A PrimeTime Primer 1: GTC CAT TGC CTG ATT CTT TGT G  PrimeTime Primer 2: GTC AGT GCA AAC CAG GAA CT 
 PrimeTime Probe: /56-FAM/AT TCT GCT G/Zen/A GAT GTG CCG GAA GT/3IABkFQ/ BIRC3 PrimeTime Primer 1: GTA GAT GAG GGT AAC TGG CTT G  PrimeTime Primer 2: GGT GTT GGG AAT CTG GAG ATG 
 PrimeTime Probe: /56-FAM/CC TTG GAA A/Zen/C CAC TTG GCA TGT TGA /3IABkFQ/  
	 5 
 Supplemental References:  1. Dobin, A, Davis, CA, Schlesinger, F, Drenkow, J, Zaleski, C, Jha, S, Batut, P, Chaisson, M, and Gingeras, TR (2013). STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29: 15-21. 2. McKenna, A, Hanna, M, Banks, E, Sivachenko, A, Cibulskis, K, Kernytsky, A, Garimella, K, Altshuler, D, Gabriel, S, Daly, M, et al. (2010). The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing next-generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res 20: 1297-1303. 3. Garrison, AaM, G (2012). Haplotype-based variant detection from short-read sequencing. 4. Love, MI, Huber, W, and Anders, S (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15: 550. 5. Ritchie, ME, Phipson, B, Wu, D, Hu, Y, Law, CW, Shi, W, and Smyth, GK (2015). limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res 43: e47. 6. Lauss, M (2018). swamp: Visualization, Analysis and Adjustment of High-Dimensional Data in Respect to Sample Annotations. . 1.4.1 ed. 7. Ashburner, M, Ball, CA, Blake, JA, Botstein, D, Butler, H, Cherry, JM, Davis, AP, Dolinski, K, Dwight, SS, Eppig, JT, et al. (2000). Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 25: 25-29. 8. The Gene Ontology, C (2017). Expansion of the Gene Ontology knowledgebase and resources. Nucleic Acids Res 45: D331-D338. 9. Aijo, T, Edelman, SM, Lonnberg, T, Larjo, A, Kallionpaa, H, Tuomela, S, Engstrom, E, Lahesmaa, R, and Lahdesmaki, H (2012). An integrative computational systems biology approach identifies differentially regulated dynamic transcriptome signatures which drive the initiation of human T helper cell differentiation. BMC Genomics 13: 572. 10. Liberzon, A, Subramanian, A, Pinchback, R, Thorvaldsdottir, H, Tamayo, P, and Mesirov, JP (2011). Molecular signatures database (MSigDB) 3.0. Bioinformatics 27: 1739-1740. 11. Subramanian, A, Tamayo, P, Mootha, VK, Mukherjee, S, Ebert, BL, Gillette, MA, Paulovich, A, Pomeroy, SL, Golub, TR, Lander, ES, et al. (2005). Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102: 15545-15550.  